And whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely. For I testify unto every man that heareth the words of the prophecy of this book, If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this book: And if any man shall take away from the words of the book of this prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of life, and out of the holy city, and from the things which are written in this book. He which testifieth these things saith, Surely I come quickly. Amen. Even so, come, Lord Jesus. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen. When our Lord and Master Jesus Christ said, ``Repent'' (Mt 4:17), he willed the entire life of believers to be one of repentance. This word cannot be understood as referring to the sacrament of penance, that is, confession and satisfaction, as administered by the clergy. Yet it does not mean solely inner repentance; such inner repentance is worthless unless it produces various outward mortification of the flesh. The penalty of sin remains as long as the hatred of self (that is, true inner repentance), namely till our entrance into the kingdom of heaven. The pope neither desires nor is able to remit any penalties except those imposed by his own authority or that of the canons. The pope cannot remit any guilt, except by declaring and showing that it has been remitted by God; or, to be sure, by remitting guilt in cases reserved to his judgment. If his right to grant remission in these cases were disregarded, the guilt would certainly remain unforgiven. God remits guilt to no one unless at the same time he humbles him in all things and makes him submissive to the vicar, the priest. The penitential canons are imposed only on the living, and, according to the canons themselves, nothing should be imposed on the dying. Therefore the Holy Spirit through the pope is kind to us insofar as the pope in his decrees always makes exception of the article of death and of necessity. Those priests act ignorantly and wickedly who, in the case of the dying, reserve canonical penalties for purgatory. Those tares of changing the canonical penalty to the penalty of purgatory were evidently sown while the bishops slept (Mt 13:25). In former times canonical penalties were imposed, not after, but before absolution, as tests of true contrition. The dying are freed by death from all penalties, are already dead as far as the canon laws are concerned, and have a right to be released from them. Imperfect piety or love on the part of the dying person necessarily brings with it great fear; and the smaller the love, the greater the fear. This fear or horror is sufficient in itself, to say nothing of other things, to constitute the penalty of purgatory, since it is very near to the horror of despair. Hell, purgatory, and heaven seem to differ the same as despair, fear, and assurance of salvation. It seems as though for the souls in purgatory fear should necessarily decrease and love increase. Furthermore, it does not seem proved, either by reason or by Scripture, that souls in purgatory are outside the state of merit, that is, unable to grow in love. Nor does it seem proved that souls in purgatory, at least not all of them, are certain and assured of their own salvation, even if we ourselves may be entirely certain of it. Therefore the pope, when he uses the words ``plenary remission of all penalties,'' does not actually mean ``all penalties,'' but only those imposed by himself. Thus those indulgence preachers are in error who say that a man is absolved from every penalty and saved by papal indulgences. As a matter of fact, the pope remits to souls in purgatory no penalty which, according to canon law, they should have paid in this life. If remission of all penalties whatsoever could be granted to anyone at all, certainly it would be granted only to the most perfect, that is, to very few. For this reason most people are necessarily deceived by that indiscriminate and high-sounding promise of release from penalty. That power which the pope has in general over purgatory corresponds to the power which any bishop or curate has in a particular way in his own diocese and parish. The pope does very well when he grants remission to souls in purgatory, not by the power of the keys, which he does not have, but by way of intercession for them. They preach only human doctrines who say that as soon as the money clinks into the money chest, the soul flies out of purgatory. It is certain that when money clinks in the money chest, greed and avarice can be increased; but when the church intercedes, the result is in the hands of God alone. Who knows whether all souls in purgatory wish to be redeemed, since we have exceptions in St. Severinus and St. Paschal, as related in a legend. No one is sure of the integrity of his own contrition, much less of having received plenary remission. The man who actually buys indulgences is as rare as he who is really penitent; indeed, he is exceedingly rare. Those who believe that they can be certain of their salvation because they have indulgence letters will be eternally damned, together with their teachers. Men must especially be on guard against those who say that the pope's pardons are that inestimable gift of God by which man is reconciled to him. For the graces of indulgences are concerned only with the penalties of sacramental satisfaction established by man. They who teach that contrition is not necessary on the part of those who intend to buy souls out of purgatory or to buy confessional privileges preach unchristian doctrine. Any truly repentant Christian has a right to full remission of penalty and guilt, even without indulgence letters. Any true Christian, whether living or dead, participates in all the blessings of Christ and the church; and this is granted him by God, even without indulgence letters. Nevertheless, papal remission and blessing are by no means to be disregarded, for they are, as I have said (Thesis 6), the proclamation of the divine remission. It is very difficult, even for the most learned theologians, at one and the same time to commend to the people the bounty of indulgences and the need of true contrition. A Christian who is truly contrite seeks and loves to pay penalties for his sins; the bounty of indulgences, however, relaxes penalties and causes men to hate them -- at least it furnishes occasion for hating them. Papal indulgences must be preached with caution, lest people erroneously think that they are preferable to other good works of love. Christians are to be taught that the pope does not intend that the buying of indulgences should in any way be compared with works of mercy. Christians are to be taught that he who gives to the poor or lends to the needy does a better deed than he who buys indulgences. Because love grows by works of love, man thereby becomes better. Man does not, however, become better by means of indulgences but is merely freed from penalties. Christians are to be taught that he who sees a needy man and passes him by, yet gives his money for indulgences, does not buy papal indulgences but God's wrath. Christians are to be taught that, unless they have more than they need, they must reserve enough for their family needs and by no means squander it on indulgences. Christians are to be taught that they buying of indulgences is a matter of free choice, not commanded. Christians are to be taught that the pope, in granting indulgences, needs and thus desires their devout prayer more than their money. Christians are to be taught that papal indulgences are useful only if they do not put their trust in them, but very harmful if they lose their fear of God because of them. Christians are to be taught that if the pope knew the exactions of the indulgence preachers, he would rather that the basilica of St. Peter were burned to ashes than built up with the skin, flesh, and bones of his sheep. Christians are to be taught that the pope would and should wish to give of his own money, even though he had to sell the basilica of St. Peter, to many of those from whom certain hawkers of indulgences cajole money. It is vain to trust in salvation by indulgence letters, even though the indulgence commissary, or even the pope, were to offer his soul as security. They are the enemies of Christ and the pope who forbid altogether the preaching of the Word of God in some churches in order that indulgences may be preached in others. Injury is done to the Word of God when, in the same sermon, an equal or larger amount of time is devoted to indulgences than to the Word. It is certainly the pope's sentiment that if indulgences, which are a very insignificant thing, are celebrated with one bell, one procession, and one ceremony, then the gospel, which is the very greatest thing, should be preached with a hundred bells, a hundred processions, a hundred ceremonies. The true treasures of the church, out of which the pope distributes indulgences, are not sufficiently discussed or known among the people of Christ. That indulgences are not temporal treasures is certainly clear, for many indulgence sellers do not distribute them freely but only gather them. Nor are they the merits of Christ and the saints, for, even without the pope, the latter always work grace for the inner man, and the cross, death, and hell for the outer man. St. Lawrence said that the poor of the church were the treasures of the church, but he spoke according to the usage of the word in his own time. Without want of consideration we say that the keys of the church, given by the merits of Christ, are that treasure. For it is clear that the pope's power is of itself sufficient for the remission of penalties and cases reserved by himself. The true treasure of the church is the most holy gospel of the glory and grace of God. But this treasure is naturally most odious, for it makes the first to be last (Mt. 20:16). On the other hand, the treasure of indulgences is naturally most acceptable, for it makes the last to be first. Therefore the treasures of the gospel are nets with which one formerly fished for men of wealth. The treasures of indulgences are nets with which one now fishes for the wealth of men. The indulgences which the demagogues acclaim as the greatest graces are actually understood to be such only insofar as they promote gain. They are nevertheless in truth the most insignificant graces when compared with the grace of God and the piety of the cross. Bishops and curates are bound to admit the commissaries of papal indulgences with all reverence. But they are much more bound to strain their eyes and ears lest these men preach their own dreams instead of what the pope has commissioned. Let him who speaks against the truth concerning papal indulgences be anathema and accursed. But let him who guards against the lust and license of the indulgence preachers be blessed. Just as the pope justly thunders against those who by any means whatever contrive harm to the sale of indulgences. Much more does he intend to thunder against those who use indulgences as a pretext to contrive harm to holy love and truth. To consider papal indulgences so great that they could absolve a man even if he had done the impossible and had violated the mother of God is madness. We say on the contrary that papal indulgences cannot remove the very least of venial sins as far as guilt is concerned. To say that even St. Peter if he were now pope, could not grant greater graces is blasphemy against St. Peter and the pope. We say on the contrary that even the present pope, or any pope whatsoever, has greater graces at his disposal, that is, the gospel, spiritual powers, gifts of healing, etc., as it is written. (1 Co 12[:28]) To say that the cross emblazoned with the papal coat of arms, and set up by the indulgence preachers is equal in worth to the cross of Christ is blasphemy. The bishops, curates, and theologians who permit such talk to be spread among the people will have to answer for this. This unbridled preaching of indulgences makes it difficult even for learned men to rescue the reverence which is due the pope from slander or from the shrewd questions of the laity. Such as: ``Why does not the pope empty purgatory for the sake of holy love and the dire need of the souls that are there if he redeems an infinite number of souls for the sake of miserable money with which to build a church?'' The former reason would be most just; the latter is most trivial. Again, ``Why are funeral and anniversary masses for the dead continued and why does he not return or permit the withdrawal of the endowments founded for them, since it is wrong to pray for the redeemed?'' Again, ``What is this new piety of God and the pope that for a consideration of money they permit a man who is impious and their enemy to buy out of purgatory the pious soul of a friend of God and do not rather, beca use of the need of that pious and beloved soul, free it for pure love's sake?'' Again, ``Why are the penitential canons, long since abrogated and dead in actual fact and through disuse, now satisfied by the granting of indulgences as though they were still alive and in force?'' Again, ``Why does not the pope, whose wealth is today greater than the wealth of the richest Crassus, build this one basilica of St. Peter with his own money rather than with the money of poor believers?'' Again, ``What does the pope remit or grant to those who by perfect contrition already have a right to full remission and blessings?'' Again, ``What greater blessing could come to the church than if the pope were to bestow these remissions and blessings on every believer a hundred times a day, as he now does but once?'' ``Since the pope seeks the salvation of souls rather than money by his indulgences, why does he suspend the indulgences and pardons previously granted when they have equal efficacy?'' To repress these very sharp arguments of the laity by force alone, and not to resolve them by giving reasons, is to expose the church and the pope to the ridicule of their enemies and to make Christians unhappy. If, therefore, indulgences were preached according to the spirit and intention of the pope, all these doubts would be readily resolved. Indeed, they would not exist. Away, then, with all those prophets who say to the people of Christ, ``Peace, peace,'' and there is no peace! (Jer 6:14) Blessed be all those prophets who say to the people of Christ, ``Cross, cross,'' and there is no cross! Christians should be exhorted to be diligent in following Christ, their Head, through penalties, death and hell. And thus be confident of entering into heaven through many tribulations rather than through the false security of peace (Acts 14:22).The most common critique leveled at New Atheists is that we attack only puerile, fundamentalist forms of religion, and never engage with the “best” arguments of the faithful: those adumbrated by Sophisticated Theologians™. Never mind that most believers accept a view of God far more anthropomorphic than a simple “ground of being” or a deistic entity that made the world and then refused to engage with it further. If you want data to support this, at least for U.S. Christians, go here. Polls consistently show that around 70-80% of Americans believe in the existence of Heaven, Hell, Satan, and angels. And let’s not even discuss whether the majority of Muslims think of Allah as a “ground of being” rather than as a disembodied ruler who tells them how to behave. Anyone who claims that regular monotheists view God like Karen Armstrong’s Apophatic Entity or Tillich’s Ground of Being simply hasn’t gotten out enough. Further, it’s obvious that the bulk of harm committed in the name of religion is done by those not who see god as a Ground of Being, but rather as an anthropomorphic entity who has a personal relationship with his minions and supplies them with a moral system. For it is the belief that God has wishes for humanity, and a code of right and wrong, that drives people to do things like oppose abortion and stem cell research, deny rights to women and gays, burn “witches,” throw acid in the faces of schoolgirls, and torture Catholics with guilt about masturbation and divorce. The vast majority of believers don’t even read theology, and are barely aware of the arguments for God made by Sophisticated Theologians™. So is it our duty as atheists to refute those arcane theological arguments, or to prevent instead the harm done by religion? To me, the latter course is preferable. Still it’s both fun and intellectually profitable to read and refute the arguments of theologians, for it’s only there that one can truly see intelligence so blatantly coopted and corrupted to prove what one has decided beforehand must be true. Theology is the only academic discipline where people get paid not to investigate their beliefs, but to rationalize them. Certainly it’s more useful for atheists to point out to “average” believers the lack of evidence for their faith—and that is precisely what Dawkins did in The God Delusion—but it’s more fun to chase the tails of obscurantists like Alvin Plantinga and John Haught. And now, apparently, their ranks include David Bentley Hart, who has written a new book that’s being touted as the most Sophisticated and Irrefutable Evidence for God Ever. The book is The Experience of God: Being, Consciousness, Bliss, and although I haven’t yet read it (believe me, I will, and have ordered it), I posted a critique of Damon Linker’s blurb for the book that appeared in The Week magazine. Another encomium has just arrived for Hart’s book, this time from Oliver Burkeman, who writes at the Guardian that The Experience of God is “The one theology book all atheists really should read.” I’m not sure whether Burkeman is an atheist, but his piece comes across as pure faitheism: “you atheists won’t make any headway until you come to grips with the arguments for God made by people like Hart.” For Hart has presented the Best Case for God, and until we’ve refuted it we lack all credibility. As Burkeman argues: Yet prominent atheists display an almost aggressive lack of curiosity when it comes to the facts about belief. In The God Delusion, Richard Dawkins expertly demolishes what he calls ‘the God hypothesis’, but devotes only a few sketchy anecdotes to establishing that this God hypothesis is the one that has defined religious belief through history, or defines it around the world today. AC Grayling insists that atheists are excused the bother of actually reading theology – where they might catch up on debates among believers about what they believe – because atheism “rejects the premise” of theology. And when The Atlantic ran a piece last year entitled Study theology, even if you don’t believe in God, Jerry Coyne, the atheist blogosphere’s Victor Meldrew, called it “the world’s worst advice.” And on and on it goes. I had to look up Victor Meldrew, who turns out to be a BBC sitcom character known for being a curmudgeon—though he had every right (like me) to be curmudgeonly. And does Burkeman realize that I spent several years reading theology before I decided that it was a mind-numbing and largely worthless exercise? It’s not like I haven’t heard their Best Arguments. And when you master one, theologians suddenly decide that there’s an even better Best Argument. The p 1. The case that provides the strongest evidence for God’s existence. This is the way scientists would settle an argument about existence claims: by adducing data. This category’s best argument for God used to be the Argument from Design, since there was no plausible alternative to God’s creation of the marvelous “designoid” features of plants and animals. But Darwin put paid to that one in 1859. Theologians now rely on arguments involving the fine-tuning of the universe or the supposed “innate morality” of human beings, but we have good secular explanations for these. 2. The philosophical argument that is most tricky, or hardest to refute: in other words, the argument for God that has the greatest degree of sophistry. This used to include the Ontological Arguments, which briefly stymied even Bertrand Russell. But we soon realized that “existence is not a quality,” and that, in fact, claims about an entity’s existence can be settled only by observation or testing, not by logic. 3. The argument that is irrefutable because it’s untestable. Given that arguments in the first two categories are now untenable, people like Hart have proposed conceptions of God that are so nebulous that we can’t figure out what they mean. And because they are not only obscure but don’t say anything tangible about the how God interacts with the cosmos, they can’t be refuted. To any rationalist or scientist, this automatically rules them out of rational consideration, for if an observation comports with everything, and can’t be disproven, it is totally useless as an explanation for anything. I might as well say that there’s an invisible teddy bear who sustains the universe, and without my Ineffable Teddy there would be no cosmos. But nobody can see that Bear, for he is the Ursine Ground of Being: ineffable and undetectable even though his Bearness permeates and supports everything. Without that Bear, the universe could not function, much less exist. And this, in fact, is what Hart has apparently done in his new book. Burkeman summarizes Hart’s Irrefutable God by quoting Linker’s characterization of it: … according to the classical metaphysical traditions of both the East and West, God is the unconditioned cause of reality – of absolutely everything that is – from the beginning to the end of time. Understood in this way, one can’t even say that God “exists” in the sense that my car or Mount Everest or electrons exist. God is what grounds the existence of every contingent thing, making it possible, sustaining it through time, unifying it, giving it actuality. God is the condition of the possibility of anything existing at all. Reread that paragraph, particularly the last line, and then see if you can explain it to one of your friends. Not only is it meaningless (I’ll read Hart’s book to see if I can suss out any meaning), but it’s also untestable. And there is not an iota of evidence for such a God, so on what ground should we believe it? Hart claims that this is the conception of God that has prevailed throughout most of history, but I seriously doubt that. Aquinas, Luther, Augustine: none of those people saw God in such a way. And it’s certainly not the view that prevails now, as you can easily see by Googling a few polls. I can make up yet another God with just as much supporting evidence as Hart’s: assume that God is a deistic God who has always been there but has done nothing. He didn’t even create the universe: he let that happen according to the laws of physics, from which universes can arise via fluctuations in a quantum vacuum. My God is just sitting there, watching over us all, but only for his amusement. He’s undetectable, ineffable, indolent, and easily bored. I claim that this Coyneian God is just as valid as Hart’s God, for neither can be tested, and thus there’s no reason to believe in either. As Burkeman notes, Hart has removed God from the class of entities that exist and transformed Him into merely an Idea: a philosophical concept that can be subject only to philosophical arguments: God, in short, isn’t one very impressive thing among many things that might or might not exist; “not just some especially resplendent object among all the objects illuminated by the light of being,” as Hart puts it. Rather, God is “the light of being itself”, the answer to the question of why there’s existence to begin with. . . . Since I can hear atheist eyeballs rolling backwards in their sockets with scorn, it’s worth saying again: the point isn’t that Hart’s right. It’s that he’s making a case that’s usually never addressed by atheists at all. If you think this God-as-the-condition-of-existence argument is rubbish, you need to say why. And unlike for the superhero version, scientific evidence won’t clinch the deal. The question isn’t a scientific one, about which things exist. It’s a philosophical one, about what existence is and on what it depends. Hart’s god, therefore, is immune to refutation. Whether God “is” now depends, as Bill Clinton anticipated, on what your definition of “is” is. But this is all a stupendous confidence game. Not only is Hart wrong in claiming that his conception of God is the one embraced most consistently through “the history of monotheism,” but, as everyone should know, how widely something is accepted is no evidence for its validity. For the vast majority of modern history, women were viewed as intellectually inferior beings. But that is simply a culturally-conditioned belief that supports no argument for female inferiority. Likewise, just because some Sophisticated Theologians™ agreed on God as a Sustainer of the Universe and Ground of All Being does not make it so. Why on earth does that argument have any force at all? Burkeman (and Hart) note that one way to dismiss Hart’s argument that only a minority of believers accept the Ground-of-Being God is “to prove the point with survey data about what people believe.” Well, I just did that above, and could adduce much more data of the same sort. Western monotheists usually believe in a personal and anthropomorphic God—one who has humanlike emotions, cares about us, and wants us to behave in certain ways. So Hart’s argument fails in the only way it can be tested. But we’re supposed to dismiss it on another ground—a dismissal that’s impossible since Hart has made his concept irrefutable: But second, even if you could show that most believers believe in a superhero God, would that mean it’s the only kind with which atheists need engage? If a committed creationist wrote a book called The Evolution Delusion, but only attacked the general public’s understanding of evolution, we’d naturally dismiss them as disingenuous. We’d demand, instead, that they seek out what the best and most acclaimed minds in the field had concluded about evolution, then try dismantling that. Which is also why atheists should read Hart’s book: to deny themselves the lazy option of sticking to easy targets. As I’ve pointed out before, these situations are not comparable. The arguments for evolution are based on evidence, not philosophy, and can be comprehended by the average person: one who, for example, read my book Why Evolution is True. Hart’s arguments are simply made-up stuff, and even though he’s smart and uses big words, there is no more evidence for his God than there is for the anthropomorphic Gods of Alvin Plantinga, Pat Robertson, and Rick Warren. In other words, the difference in expertise between theologians and “average” believers is small—not nearly as great as the difference in expertise between professional evolutionists and science-friendly laypeople. The difference between theologians and believers is not their differential acquaintance with the truth about God, but the greater acquaintance of theologians with the history of theology. People like Hart, despite their intelligence, have no more handle on the nature of God than do Joe and Sally in the street. Theologians are, as we all know, simply confecting things about God, and then selling them using fancy words and their academic credentials. Let Hart give us one bit of evidence that he has greater insight into God than, say, Rick Warren, and then I’ll pay attention to what he has to say. Otherwise, I see Hart as retreating to the Last Redoubt of the Theologian: the definition of God as something that is immune to all disproof—and thus subject to Hitchens’ Razor: “what can be asserted without evidence can be dismissed without evidence.” Isaac Chotiner has pointed out some of these problems in a new piece in these pages that is also based on Linker’s blurb for Hart: “The case for God’s existence is empowering atheists.” Chotiner agrees that Hart has simply redefined God in a way that immunizes Him against disproof, equating God with emotions shared by many people: Linker continues with this: “In a move sure to enrage atheists, Hart even goes so far as to argue that faith in this classical notion of God can never be ‘wholly and coherently rejected’ — and not only because it may very well be self-contradictory to prove the nonexistence of an absolute, transcendent ground of existence.” If this is not tautologous enough for you, try [Linker's] comment: “The deeper reason why theism can’t be rejected, according to Hart, is that every pursuit of truth, every attempt to be good, every longing for beauty presupposes the existence of some idea of truth, goodness, and beauty from which these particular instances are derived. And these transcendental ideas unite in the classical concept of God, who simply is truth, goodness, and beauty. That’s why, although it isn’t necessary to believe in God in some explicit way in order to be good, it certainly is the case (in Hart’s words) ‘that to seek the good is already to believe in God, whether one wishes to do so or not.’” Here I would turn again to Linker’s comment implying that the “major world religions” have a view of God similar to the one that Linker lays out above. If you think this is the case, ask yourself how many major world religions will consider you a believer in their particular faiths just because you merely state that you “seek the good,” which I would hope nearly all of us do. In summary, Linker is unable to make a case for God that doesn’t define God as such an intrinsic part of the universe (“truth, goodness, and beauty”) that God exists by definition. If I were a religious believer, I would likely neither appreciate the concessions that Linker has made, nor go along with his account of my beliefs. Chotiner is absolutely correct. If you define God as simply the set of our most admirable aspirations, then of course God exists. But you could also define God as the set of our most unpalatable aspirations: greed, duplicity, criminality, and so on. And that kind of god could also exist by definition: as the Ground of All Evil. I claim that, in fact, there’s just as much evidence for that god as there is for Hart’s “good” God. The reader might amuse herself by thinking of other kinds of irrefutable gods. So if I had to ask Hart three questions, they would be these: 1. On what basis do you know that God is a Ground-of-Being God instead of an anthropomorphic God? (In your answer, you cannot include as evidence the dubious claim that the former God is the one most people have accepted throughout history.) 2. How do you know that your Ground-of-Being god embodies truth, goodness, and beauty rather than lies, evil, and ugliness? 3. What would convince you that the god you describe doesn’t exist?I should make it clear from the start that I have no religious agenda. I’m not a believer. I’m not a committed atheist either. For 10 years, I was an editor at Scientific American. During that time, we were diligent about exposing the falsehoods of “intelligent design” proponents who claimed to see God’s hand in the fashioning of complex biological structures such as the human eye and the bacterial flagellum. But in 2008 I left journalism to write fiction. I wrote novels about Albert Einstein and quantum theory and the mysteries of the cosmos. And ideas about God keep popping up in my books. Should scientists even try to answer questions about the purpose of the universe? Most researchers assume that science and religion are completely separate fields—or, in the phrase coined by evolutionary biologist Stephen Jay Gould, “nonoverlapping magisteria.” But as physicists investigate the most fundamental characteristics of nature, they’re tackling issues that have long been the province of philosophers and theologians: Is the universe infinite and eternal? Why does it seem to follow mathematical laws, and are those laws inevitable? And, perhaps most important, why does the universe exist? Why is there something instead of nothing? ADVERTISEMENT Medieval philosopher Thomas Aquinas posed similar questions in his 13th-century book Summa Theologica, which presented several arguments for God’s existence. He observed that all worldly objects can change from potential to actuality—an ice cube can melt, a child can grow—but the cause of that change must be something besides that object (warm air melts the ice cube, food nourishes the child). The history of the universe can thus be seen as an endless chain of changes, but Aquinas argued that there must be some transcendent entity that initiated the chain, something that is itself unchanging and that already possesses all of the properties that worldly objects can come to possess. He also claimed that this entity must be eternal; because it is the root of all causes, nothing else could’ve caused it. And unlike all worldly objects, the transcendent entity is necessary—it must exist. Aquinas defined that entity as God. This reasoning came to be known as the cosmological argument, and many philosophers elaborated on it. In the 18th century, German philosopher Gottfried Leibniz described God as “as “a necessary being which has its reason for existence in itself.” It’s interesting to note that Leibniz was also a mathematician and physicist; he invented differential and integral calculus at about the same time that Isaac Newton did. (They developed the math independently.) Both Leibniz and Newton considered themselves natural philosophers, and they freely jumped back and forth between science and theology. By the 20th century, most scientists no longer devised proofs of God’s existence, but the connection between physics and faith hadn’t been entirely severed. Einstein, who frequently spoke about religion, didn’t believe in a personal God who influences history or human behavior, but he wasn’t an atheist either. He preferred to call himself agnostic, although he sometimes leaned toward the pantheism of Jewish-Dutch philosopher Baruch Spinoza, who proclaimed, in the 17th century, that God is identical with nature. Likewise, Einstein compared the human race to a small child in a library full of books written in unfamiliar languages: “The child notes a definite plan in the arrangement of the books, a mysterious order, which it does not comprehend, but only dimly suspects. That, it seems to me, is the attitude of the human mind, even the greatest and most cultured, toward God. We see a universe marvelously arranged, obeying certain laws, but we understand the laws only dimly.” Einstein often invoked God when he talked about physics. In 1919, after British scientists confirmed Einstein’s general theory of relativity by detecting the bending of starlight around the sun, he was asked how he would’ve reacted if the researchers hadn’t found the supporting evidence. “Then I would have felt sorry for the dear Lord,” Einstein said. “The theory is correct.” His attitude was a strange mix of humility and arrogance. He was clearly awed by the laws of physics and grateful that they were mathematically decipherable. (“The eternal mystery of the world is its comprehensibility,” he said. “The fact that it is comprehensible is a miracle.”) ADVERTISEMENT But during the 1920s and 1930s, hefiercely resisted the emerging field of quantum mechanics because it clashed with his firm belief that the universe is deterministic—that is, physical actions always have predictable effects. Einstein famously criticized the indeterminacy of quantum theory by saying, God “does not play dice” with the universe. (Niels Bohr, the father of quantum mechanics, is said to have remarked, “Einstein, stop telling God what to do.”) Although quantum theory is now the foundation of particle physics, many scientists still share Einstein’s discomfort with its implications. The theory has revealed aspects of nature that seem supernatural: the act of observing something can apparently alter its reality, and quantum entanglement can weave together distant pieces of spacetime. (Einstein derisively called it “spooky action at a distance.”) The laws of nature also put strict limits on what we can learn about the universe. We can’t peer inside black holes, for example, or view anything that lies beyond the distance that light has traveled since the start of the big bang. Is there a place in this universe for the causative God of Aquinas and Leibniz? Or maybe the more diffuse God of Spinoza? The late particle physicist Victor Stenger addressed this question in his 2007 book God: The Failed Hypothesis. (To make his position clear, he gave the book the subtitle How Science Shows That God Does Not Exist.) Stenger quickly dismissed the theist notion of a God who responds to prayers and cures ill children, because scientists would’ve noticed that kind of divine intervention by now. Then he argued, less convincingly, against the existence of a deist God who created the universe and its laws and then stood back and watched it run. newsletter promo Sign up for Scientific American’s free newsletters. Sign Up Stenger contended that many laws of nature (such as the conservation of energy) follow inevitably from the observed symmetries of the universe (there’s no special point or direction in space, for example). “There is no reason why the laws of physics cannot have come from within the universe itself,” he wrote. Explaining the creation of the universe is trickier, though. Cosmologists don’t know if the universe even had a beginning. Instead it might’ve had an eternal past before the big bang, stretching infinitely backward in time. Some cosmological models propose that the universe has gone through endless cycles of expansion and contraction. And some versions of the theory of inflation postulate an eternal process in which new universes are forever branching off from the speedily expanding “inflationary background.” But other cosmologists argue that inflation had to start somewhere, and the starting point could’ve been essentially nothing. As we’ve learned from quantum theory, even empty space has energy, and nothingness is unstable. All kinds of improbable things can happen in empty space, and one of them might’ve been a sudden drop to a lower vacuum energy, which could’ve triggered the inflationary expansion. ADVERTISEMENT For Stenger, this theoretical possibility was evidence that God isn’t needed for Creation. “The natural state of affairs is something rather than nothing,” he wrote. “An empty universe requires supernatural intervention—not a full one.” But this conclusion seems a bit hasty. Scientists don’t fully comprehend the quantum world yet, and their hypotheses about the first moments of Creation aren’t much more than guesses at this point. We need to discover and understand the fundamental laws of physics before we can say they’re inevitable. And we need to explore the universe and its history a little more thoroughly before we can make such definitive statements about its origins. Just for the sake of argument, though, let’s assume this hypothesis of Quantum Creation is correct. Suppose we do live in a universe that generated its own laws and called itself into being. Doesn’t that sound like Leibniz’s description of God (“a necessary being which has its reason for existence in itself”)? It’s also similar to Spinoza’s pantheism, his proposition that the universe as a whole is God. Instead of proving that God doesn’t exist, maybe science will broaden our definition of divinity. But let’s not get ahead of ourselves. To spur humanity’s search for meaning, we should prioritize the funding of advanced telescopes and other scientific instruments that can provide the needed data to researchers studying fundamental physics. And maybe this effort will lead to breakthroughs in theology as well. The pivotal role of observers in quantum theory is very curious. Is it possible that the human race has a cosmic purpose after all? Did the universe blossom into an untold number of realities, each containing billions of galaxies and vast oceans of emptiness between them, just to produce a few scattered communities of observers? Is the ultimate goal of the universe to observe its own splendor?I still believed in God (I am now an atheist) when I heard the following question at a seminar, first posed by Einstein, and was stunned by its elegance and depth: "If there is a God who created the entire universe and ALL of its laws of physics, does God follow God's own laws? Or can God supersede his own laws, such as travelling faster than the speed of light and thus being able to be in two different places at the same time?" Could the answer help us prove whether or not God exists or is this where scientific empiricism and religious faith intersect, with NO true answer? David Frost, 67, Los Angeles. I was in lockdown when I received this question and was instantly intrigued. It's no wonder about the timing – tragic events, such as pandemics, often cause us to question the existence of God: if there is a merciful God, why is a catastrophe like this happening? The idea that God might be "bound" by the laws of physics – which also govern chemistry and biology and thus the limits of medical science – was an interesting one to explore. If God wasn't able to break the laws of physics, she arguably wouldn't be as powerful as you'd expect a supreme being to be. But if she could, why haven't we seen any evidence of the laws of physics ever being broken in the Universe? To tackle the question, let's break it down a bit. First, can God travel faster than light? Let's just take the question at face value. Light travels at an approximate speed of 3 x 10 to the power of 5 kilometres every second, or 186,000 miles per second (299,500km/s). We learn at school that nothing can travel faster than the speed of light – not even the USS Enterprise in Star Trek when its dilithium crystals are set to max. You might also like: What is the future of religion? Do humans have a religion instinct? How fast can humans travel? But is it true? A few years ago, a group of physicists posited that particles called tachyons travelled above light speed. Fortunately, their existence as real particles is deemed highly unlikely. If they did exist, they would have an imaginary mass and the fabric of space and time would become distorted – leading to violations of causality (and possibly a headache for God). It seems, so far, that no object has been observed that can travel faster than the speed of light. This in itself does not say anything at all about God. It merely reinforces the knowledge that light travels very fast indeed. If God exists, one question would be whether they would be bound to the laws of sciences such as physics (Credit: Alamy) If God exists, one question would be whether they would be bound to the laws of sciences such as physics (Credit: Alamy) Things get a bit more interesting when you consider how far light has travelled since the beginning. Assuming a traditional big bang cosmology and a light speed of 300,000km/s, then we can calculate that light has travelled roughly 1.3 x 10 x 23 (1.3 times 10 to the power 23) km in the 13.8 billion years of the Universe's existence. Or rather, the observable Universe's existence. The Universe is expanding at a rate of approximately 70km/s per Mpc (1 Mpc = 1 Megaparsec or roughly 30 billion billion kilometres), so current estimates suggest that the distance to the edge of the universe is 46 billion light years. As time goes on, the volume of space increases, and light has to travel for longer to reach us. There is a lot more universe out there than we can view, but the most distant object that we have seen is a galaxy, GN-z11, observed by the Hubble Space Telescope. This is approximately 1.2 x 10 x 23 km or 13.4 billion light years away, meaning that it has taken 13.4 billion years for light from the galaxy to reach us. But when the light "set off", the galaxy was only about three billion light years away from our galaxy, the Milky Way. Many cosmologists believe that the Universe may be part of a more extended cosmos, a multiverse We cannot observe or see across the entirety of the Universe that has grown since the Big Bang because insufficient time has passed for light from the first fractions of a second to reach us. Some argue that we therefore cannot be sure whether the laws of physics could be broken in other cosmic regions – perhaps they are just local, accidental laws. And that leads us on to something even bigger than the Universe. The multiverse Many cosmologists believe that the Universe may be part of a more extended cosmos, a multiverse, where many different universes co-exist but don't interact. The idea of the multiverse is backed by the theory of inflation – the idea that the universe expanded hugely before it was 10^-32 seconds old. Inflation is an important theory because it can explain why the Universe has the shape and structure that we see around us. But if inflation could happen once, why not many times? We know from experiments that quantum fluctuations can give rise to pairs of particles suddenly coming into existence, only to disappear moments later. And if such fluctuations can produce particles, why not entire atoms or universes? It's been suggested that, during the period of chaotic inflation, not everything was happening at the same rate – quantum fluctuations in the expansion could have produced bubbles that blew up to become universes in their own right. But how does God fit into the multiverse? One headache for cosmologists has been the fact that our Universe seems fine-tuned for life to exist. The fundamental particles created in the Big Bang had the correct properties to enable the formation of hydrogen and deuterium – substances which produced the first stars. Could quantum physics help explain a God that could be in two places at once? (Credit: Nasa) Could quantum physics help explain a God that could be in two places at once? (Credit: Nasa) The physical laws governing nuclear reactions in these stars then produced the stuff that life's made of – carbon, nitrogen and oxygen. How come all the physical laws and parameters in the universe happen to have the values that allowed stars, planets and ultimately life to develop? Some argue it's just a lucky coincidence. Others say we shouldn't be surprised to see biofriendly physical laws – they after all produced us, so what else would we see? Some theists, however, argue it points to the existence of a God creating favourable conditions. But God isn't a valid scientific explanation. The theory of the multiverse, instead, solves the mystery because it allows different universes to have different physical laws. So, it's not surprising that we should happen to see ourselves in one of the few universes that could support life. Of course, you can't disprove the idea that a God may have created the multiverse. If two particles are entangled, you automatically manipulate its partner when you manipulate it This is all very hypothetical, and one of the biggest criticisms of theories of the multiverse is that because there seem to have been no interactions between our Universe and other universes, then the notion of the multiverse cannot be directly tested. Quantum weirdness Now let's consider whether God can be in more than one place at the same time. Much of the science and technology we use in space science is based on the counter-intuitive theory of the tiny world of atoms and particles known as quantum mechanics. The theory enables something called quantum entanglement: spookily connected particles. If two particles are entangled, you automatically manipulate its partner when you manipulate it, even if they are very far apart and without the two interacting. There are better descriptions of entanglement than the one I give here – but this is simple enough that I can follow it. Imagine a particle that decays into two sub-particles, A and B. The properties of the sub-particles must add up to the properties of the original particle – this is the principle of conservation. For example, all particles have a quantum property called "spin" – roughly, they move as if they were tiny compass needles. If the original particle has a "spin" of zero, one of the two sub-particles must have a positive spin and the other a negative spin, which means that each of A and B has a 50% chance of having a positive or a negative spin. (According to quantum mechanics, particles are by definition in a mix of different states until you actually measure them.) Albert Einstein described quantum entanglement as “spooky action at a distance” (Credit: Getty Images) Albert Einstein described quantum entanglement as “spooky action at a distance” (Credit: Getty Images) The properties of A and B are not independent of each other – they are entangled – even if located in separate laboratories on separate planets. If you measure the spin of A and you find it to be positive, then imagine a friend measured the spin of B at exactly the same time that you measured A. In order for the principle of conservation to work, she must find the spin of B to be negative. But – and this is where things become murky – like sub-particle A, B had a 50:50 chance of being positive, so its spin state "became" negative at the time that the spin state of A was measured as positive. In other words, information about spin state was transferred between the two sub-particles instantly. Such transfer of quantum information apparently happens faster than the speed of light. Given that Einstein himself described quantum entanglement as "spooky action at a distance", I think all of us can be forgiven for finding this a rather bizarre effect. So, there is something faster than the speed of light after all: quantum information. This doesn't prove or disprove God, but it can help us think of God in physical terms – maybe as a shower of entangled particles, transferring quantum information back and forth, and so occupying many places at the same time? Even many universes at the same time? Science requires proof, religious belief requires faith I have this image of God keeping galaxy-sized plates spinning while juggling planet-sized balls – tossing bits of information from one teetering universe to another, to keep everything in motion. Fortunately, God can multitask – keeping the fabric of space and time in operation. All that is required is a little faith. Has this essay come close to answering the questions posed? I suspect not: if you believe in God (as I do), then the idea of God being bound by the laws of physics is nonsense, because God can do everything, even travel faster than light. If you don't believe in God, then the question is equally nonsensical, because there isn't a God and nothing can travel faster than light. Perhaps the question is really one for agnostics, who don't know whether there is a God.There are a couple things I can appreciate about the “Who designed the Designer?” argument. Although it is rooted in a caricature of the Kalam cosmological argument’s first premise (“Whatever begins to exist has a cause”), it is a positive argument for atheism, and it does attempt to deal with the God hypothesis in the only arena where God’s existence may be decisively confirmed or refuted: the arena of philosophy. The God defended by Christian theists is a transcendent, eternal, and spiritual being. He is the one creator of all physical reality and existed before all of time, space, matter, and energy. Being “outside” the natural world, God cannot be discovered nor refuted by science alone. For this reason the arguments for and against God’s existence must be, in the end, philosophical. For instance, if the skeptic could expose an error in the formulation of the popular Kalam argument—say, that its major premise “Whatever begins to exist has a cause” is false—then this would force one of theism’s most compelling arguments to the chopping block. Indeed, such a refutation has been attempted by astrophysicist Lawrence Krauss, for example, who tried to claim in his book A Universe from Nothing that the universe indeed can and did arise from nothing. Word on Fire Liturgy of the Hours LEARN MORE Introducing the Word on Fire Liturgy of the Hours Krauss was critically rebuked in the New York Times by fellow atheist David Albert for equivocating on the word nothing. Of course, even if Krauss had been successful and the validity of the Kalam argument had been seriously maligned, this would still not prove definitively that atheism is true; it would only disprove one theistic argument. How then can the atheist go the full distance and prove theism false? He can show that a divine attribute (e.g., omniscience) is internally contradictory in itself; he can show that two or more of the divine attributes contradict one another; or he can show that God’s attributes contradict a known fact about the world we live in. Let’s consider three of God’s best-known divine attributes: his omniscience, omnipotence, and omnipresence. First, let’s work out our definition of God a bit more. As noted, God is pure spirit—an immaterial “mind”—who exists outside of time and space. We may also say that he is the perfect act of being itself, and thus all perfections are in him. In other words, God cannot be perfected further because he is infinite perfection. Because God has no parts, is infinite in being, and is therefore absolutely “simple,” we can say that God’s infinite power is his infinite goodness, which is his infinite knowledge, and so on. Thus, in the end, it is much more profitable for us to speak about God in analogies (all-powerful, etc.) and to speak about what God is not (spaceless, etc). OMNISCIENCE Now let’s consider God’s omniscience. God knows all truths and accepts nothing false as true. But could an all-good God know what it is like to sin? Yes, for God knows all truths; but he doesn’t know all truths directly from personal experience. God knows what it is like to sin by knowing what it is like for us to sin. Now, if God is all-knowing—if he knows everything every person will ever do—what does that mean for our free will? Is such causal liberty an illusion? Not at all. I can know my influenza-stricken, gagging child is about to vomit without causing her to vomit. Foreknowledge does not equal causality. OMNIPOTENCE This brings us to the claim of God’s omnipotence. Is there any philosophical contradiction that can be drawn out of God’s infinite power? As we have noted, God cannot sin because he is morally perfect, the perfect standard of what it means to be good. Thus God has the power to do all logically possible things—that is, he has the power to do all meaningful things. That is why he cannot create a four-sided triangle (which is really nothing at all). Nor can God create a rock that is too heavy for his all-powerful self to lift. Such a notion is meaningless, because it fails to acknowledge how God really is. A bachelor cannot forget his wife’s birthday because he is a bachelor; God cannot be overpowered by any creature because he is omnipotent. OMNIPRESENCE Finally, what about God’s omnipresence? How can this be so? Well, as long as God is unbound by time and space there is no contradiction. Not only has God created all things, but also his presence is necessary to sustain them in being, just as the presence of hydrogen atoms is necessary to sustain water in being. God is present to all beings, but he is not all beings (that’s pantheism). He is present to all things, and the existence of all things is dependent on his presence, just as the caller of a square dance is present to the dancers on the floor and the existence of the square dance depends on the mind (and voice) of the caller. Daily Gospel Reflections Bishop Barron’s Gospel Reflections straight to your inbox. Email SIGN UP TODAY Thus God, who contains all perfections within himself, can rightly be referred to as all-powerful, all-good, all-knowing, etc. We cannot say (by the way) that God is a “pre-eminently peerless stinker”—contrary to the charge of Dr. Dawkins—because stinkiness is a privation of a good; but God is perfectly good. Such an assertion of God’s infinite stinkiness is an amusing bit of rhetoric, but it does not in the least follow logically from the given philosophical definition of God. It betrays Dawkins’ misunderstanding of who God is. It suffices to say that philosophical proofs for or against God’s existence will not be sufficiently worked out without rigorous intellectual groundwork. Indeed, the finite limits of human reason that force us into analogies and negative statements about God can sometimes lead to frustration and headaches. But I side with G.K. Chesterton, who acknowledged “the riddles of God are more satisfying than the solutions of man.” pieces on atheism. Atheists, it turns out, get attacked from all sides. Intellectuals attack the robustness of our arguments; and the religious attack the content. Which is all fine – I am putting myself out there and the debate is worthwhile and welcomed. These are weighty matters and one shouldn’t decide one’s position lightly. So I’m going to be upfront: my hope and goal is that the belief in God, and the religions that underpin it, are wiped from the face the earth. I think they are pernicious, facile and malevolent, and I think the world would be a better place without them. If I can make any contribution to this, no matter how small, I consider that worthwhile. So now that my cards are on the table, I thought I’d lay out what I consider to be the best five reasons to stop believing. I don’t imagine that any fundamentalist Muslims or reborn Christians are going to be persuaded, but for those on the fence or open to the possibility of non-belief, this may tip you over the edge. I also, by the way, don’t hope to satisfy academic philosophers with the rigours of my case. You guys don’t need my help with this stuff anyway. No evidence Most things which we accept, we accept on the basis of proof. That proof is not always rock solid (some of it is based on spurious media claims, for example) but there is a standard to which we hold most of our beliefs. Things that don’t meet that standard – the Tooth Fairy, let’s say – we discard as not impossible, but extremely unlikely. God, however, many people accept with no proof at all. Belief in God is a product of upbringing, societal and cultural convention, a desire for comfort and intellectual laziness. There is no evidence that God exists. You may have had some kind of personal experience – what we “anecdotal evidence” that has convinced you personally that he’s out there. But most people would concede that that kind of evidence is not evidence at all. It can’t be repeated under test conditions and there are other possible explanations for what may have happened. Fact: no-one has ever presented one iota of persuasive evidence that there is a God. It’s illogical In the absence of evidence, some people try to argue that there “must be” a God because nothing else makes sense. This “not making sense” ranges from the naïve (“I just feel that there must be a bigger purpose to life”) to the sophisticated arguments presented by theologians, philosophers and apologists. I cannot present and knock down every instance of these arguments here. However, I can say this: the idea that one can reason God into existence is a failed project. The best anyone has been able to do is to show that God could be an explanation for how the universe got here – and could be the “best available explanation”. I wouldn’t accept either of these, but even I did, they do not constitute a conclusive, logical position. If you are comfortable with a “maybe”, then you are welcome to it. But the existence of God has not been logically proven by anyone, ever. The preponderance of suffering In a recent interview, the British comedian Stephen Fry delivered a vicious, scathing attack on the Judeo-Christian God when asked what he would say if it turned out, after he died, that God did in fact exist. He called this God a “maniac”, pointing to the large amount of unnecessary suffering in the world which he, by definition, created and allows. The existence of suffering is an impossible problem for believers in an all-good, caring God to solve. Even if they use the wiggle room to argue that without some suffering there can be no charity; or that people who do wrong are punished, they cannot account for the suffering of innocent children and animals, or worse, the devout believers in their faith. What kind of God, we may ask – and Fry does, more colourfully – has created a world in which children die in floods, starve to death, perish in agony from TB and malaria? What kind of God allows people who worship and adore him to be murdered, raped, tortured and come to countless other hideous ends? This does not preclude the existence of any God, of course. God might be, as Fry has it, a maniac. He may be a vicious, sadistic God. Or, like the Greeks and Romans before us, he may be a pantheon of narcissistic Gods who have no interest in looking out for us. But a God who was benevolent and loving, as we are told the Christian God is, would never create the world we live in. Believing in him requires either shuttering yourself off from the carnage all around you; or crafting frankly ridiculous excuses (God works in mysterious ways?). We don’t need him This isn’t exactly an argument against the truth of God, but it is a reason to stop worrying about him. We don’t require God – he is an unnecessary addition to the universe, and it can get along perfectly well without him. The most common two arguments for why we “need” God is as a personal saviour or caretaker, and that without him (and religion) we would not know what is morally right and wrong. Let me start with the last first. Human morality is not brought into existence by God or the Bible. We do not require a commandment to tell us that killing is wrong, and we do not need the threat of eternal damnation to make us do what is right. To prove this I need only point out that most Western states operate on the basis of a constitution and the rule of law and have nothing to do with religion or the Bible. Killing someone has legal consequences, and most normal people with a conscience regard it as wrong without the need for a cosmic force to tell them. Oh, but I hear you say, surely these laws and rights have a Biblical origin? Do you really believe that? Do you think that pre-religious societies had no taboos in regard to the preservation of life, property and other things we hold dear? That a principle like “do unto others” would not naturally emerge from any group of sentient beings living in the same place? This is quite apart from the fact that many of the laws in the Bible are just wicked. We have not, thankfully and for the most part, transferred most of Leviticus and Deuteronomy into modern law. Those Islamic states who have, and which enforce Sharia law, are widely regarded as zones of horror by most sensible people. Then: do we need God as a personal saviour? Well, some people might. The idea of God might provide comfort and an explanation for the mysteries of the universe. However, it is misleading to say he is “needed”. Many people survive and thrive perfectly well without a God concept or religion – myself being one example. We do not rampage or lose our way or become outcasts. And so, whilst certain individuals may derive comfort from a belief in God – as is their right – this is neither a necessary or a sufficient condition for living a good life. Life’s better without him Religion is about control and limitation. Rules, laws and rituals that restrict and govern behaviour. In some cases – say the genital mutilation of infants in barbaric rites of passage practised by religions such as Judiasm – they actually persuade nice people to do awful things. Which is to say nothing of the countless other horrors committed in the name of God and religion. Suicide bombings, torture, genocide, forced marriages, unwanted babies, war – the list is endless. A life without religion and without God thus offers freedom from all of these miseries. It offers a person the opportunity to do what they like, in line with their own moral code, within the parameters of the society in which they live. Each decision to be taken is evaluated on its own merits, weighing up the pros and cons, and is not forced down a path by a pre-existing code of conduct dating from a time of ignorance and superstition. Life is better without God and religion encouraging you to make poor choices, and validating them when you do. The journey into escaping the God idea, and rejecting religion, can be a long one. For those deeply invested in these notions they may begin by being unable to imagine a meaningful life without them. However, it starts with a seed of doubt. With the sense that a fairy story is at work here – not the solid rock of reality. Perhaps these five arguments will plant that small seed for some reading this piece. DM Religion, spirituality, and mental health and social behaviour in young adulthood: A longitudinal study A thesis submitted for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy at The University of Queensland in April 2007, Rosemary Lyn Aird, School of Population Health. Candidate’s Statement of Originality The work presented in this thesis is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, original and my own, except where acknowledged in the text. This material has not been submitted either in whole or part, for a degree at this or any other University. ……………………………………………………………. Rosemary Lyn Aird ……………………………………………………………... Principal Academic Advisor, Professor Jackob M. Najman ii Acknowledgments All study mothers and children from the Mater-University of Queensland Study of Pregnancy, and particularly those who participated in the most recent wave of the study – the 21-year follow-up (MUSP21). The writing of this thesis has only been made possible because of the ongoing goodwill and generosity of these participants since 1981. All those who have contributed to the MUSP project since its commencement, including past and current MUSP Principal Investigators, Professor Jake M. Najman (one of the founders of the study in 1979), Dr William Bor, Associate Professor Michael O’Callaghan, Professor Gail Williams, past and present members of the MUSP Research Team, the National Health and Medical Research Council for funding all major phases of the MUSP study, the Telstra Foundation for providing additional funding for MUSP21, as well as the School of Social Science, Faculty of Behavioural Science, School of Population Health and School of Medicine (Southern Clinical Division), Faculty of Health Sciences, The University of Queensland, and the Mater Misericordiae Hospital, South Brisbane. Ms Margaret Andersen, past Principal Investigator, and the MUSP data collection teams from phases of the study that took place between 1981 and 1997. The MUSP21 data collection team (2002 to 2004) deserve special acknowledgment from me. Due to my role as Project Manager of MUSP21, I have first-hand knowledge of this team’s tireless attention to detail and their ongoing enthusiasm for their work, despite the many challenges faced in gathering data on around 8,000 participants via fieldwork interviews throughout Brisbane and surrounding districts, as well as mail returned questionnaires throughout Australia and overseas. Particular thanks go to Kelly Quinlan (Assistant Project Manager) and Ruth Armstrong (Senior Research Officer, in charge of tracking and contacting participants during the last three phases of the study, and Manager of MUSP14) whose competence, commitment, integrity, and caring for others will be long remembered by all who came in contact with them during MUSP21. Much appreciation goes also to research interviewers Stacey Allerton, Pauline Bonnici, Emma Brown, Sophie Gudgeon, Jatinder Kaur, Jane Maclean, Amanda Margerison, Kobie Mulligan, and office staff, Nona Cameron, Rel Constantine, Rachel Bor, and numerous others. The quality and magnitude of the 21-year dataset is a testament to the MUSP21 team’s combined skills, effort, and dedication. Thanks too to Dr William Bor, Associate Professor Michael O’ Callaghan, and Professor Jake Najman for the personal encouragement and support they gave to the MUSP21 data collection team throughout 2002 to 2004. Academic Supervisor, Professor Jake Najman and Associate Supervisor, Dr Abdullah Al iii Mamun for their advice, feedback and other support during the writing of this thesis. MUSP Data Manager, Gregory Shuttlewood, for his friendship, support and assistance with data-related matters over the past eight years. Professor John McGrath, Centre of Schizophrenia Research, Wacol, and Dr James Scott, Royal Brisbane Hospital, for their support and advice on the instrument used to measure delusional ideation (Peters et al. Delusions Inventory). All those involved with the design of the MUSP21 project, including Yolanda van Gellecum, for her role in helping to ensure that the items measuring traditional and non- traditional religious/spiritual beliefs were included in MUSP21 survey forms. The Australian Federation of University Women – South Australia Inc. Trust Fund for awarding me a Daphne Elliott Bursary, to assist with travel costs associated with the presentation of part of my PhD research at the International Conference of Interdisciplinary Social Sciences held on the Island of Rhodes, Greece in 2006. My sister, Sharon Burke (B.Soc.Wk., Grad.Dip.Mgt), and Sam Alcock for their proofreading and editing assistance with the final draft of this thesis. Finally, thanks to my partner Stephen Johnson for never tiring of our conversations about the subject matter of this thesis, my two sons and Steve’s three sons, as well as my extended family for supporting my interest in academic studies, and for their understanding of the large periods of my time taken away from them because of my commitment to the MUSP project and my academic studies. Special thanks too, to my mother who readily agreed to the inclusion of information related to her spiritual interests and activities in the introductory chapter of this thesis. iv Abstract Background: The concept spirituality appears to be gaining increasing attention for its potential relationship to mental health, despite there being an absence of consensus on what spirituality is or whether it can be distinguished from religion (or religiousness) in operational terms. Spirituality is a term that is embraced within secular and non-secular contexts alike. As a consequence, spirituality as a concept encompasses forms of religiosity that are embedded in traditional religion and those that have little or no connection to traditional religious teachings. The emergence of religious/spiritual beliefs that depart from traditional religious thought represents one key feature of widespread religious change in contemporary societies. Non- traditional religious/spiritual beliefs need to be viewed within this context and thus be differentiated from traditional religious/spiritual beliefs when investigating connections between religion, spirituality, and mental health. Aims: The current study seeks to compare the mental health of those whose beliefs are rooted in religious tradition with those whose beliefs deviate from traditional religious thought. The two main objectives of this study are: (1) to determine the extent to which religious background predicts endorsement of traditional and non-traditional religious/spiritual beliefs and church attendance in young adulthood; and (2) to determine whether differential relationships exist between current religiosity, religious background, and mental health in young adulthood, and whether any observed differences are attributable to other characteristics of respondents like sociodemographic factors and health-risk behaviours. Methods: Data were derived from the Mater-University of Queensland Study of Pregnancy, a longitudinal, prospective study of maternal and child health from the prenatal period to 21 years post-delivery. Religiosity was assessed among the study children in young adulthood from three items measured at the time of the 21-year follow-up. Religious background was assessed from information provided by the study mothers in earlier phases of the study. Young adult responses to items included in the Young Adult Self Report (Achenbach, 1997) were used to assess cases of anxiety/depression and externalising behaviour, and delusional ideation was assessed from their responses to the 21-item Peters et al. Delusions Inventory (PDI) (Peters & Garety, 1996). Results: Belief in a spiritual or higher power other than God was found to be positively related to anxiety/depression, disturbed ideation, suspiciousness and paranormal ideation, high total PDI scores, as well as antisocial behaviour in young adulthood, regardless of gender. These associations persisted after adjustment for potential confounders. By contrast, young adults who maintain a traditional belief in God appear to be no different to those who reject this belief in v regard to anxiety/depression. Belief in God was found to have no association with antisocial behaviour for males, but was observed to have a weak negative relationship with antisocial behaviour for females. This association failed to reach statistical significance however, after adjustment for other religious/spiritual and social characteristics. No associations were found between young adult belief in God and disturbed, suspicious or paranormal ideation, although a positive relationship was identified for high total PDI scores. Weekly church attendance was observed to reduce the likelihood of antisocial behaviour in young adulthood among males, but not females. Religious ideation was found to more prevalent among young adults who attend church on either a weekly or infrequent basis. No long-term effects on anxiety/depression or antisocial behaviour were evident from maternal belief in God, church attendance or religious affiliation in the young adults’ early lives. However, maternal church attendance predicted religious ideation in young adulthood. Offspring of mothers affiliated with a Pentecostal church in the prenatal period appear to have a high rate of religious ideation and high total PDI scores. Paranormal ideation in young adulthood appears to have no association with maternal religiosity in a young adult’s early life. Conclusion: The findings from this study suggest that young adults who endorse non- traditional religious/spiritual beliefs are at greater risk for poorer mental health and aberrant social behaviour than those who reject these beliefs. These results suggest that a non-traditional religious/spiritual belief system involves more than mere rejection of traditional religious doctrine. This system of belief may be a marker for those who question the legitimacy of established societal norms and values, and whose thoughts, attitudes and actions reflect this position. This possibility has implications for mental health and wellbeing at both an individual and a societal level and warrants further research attention. vi List of Presentations while undertaking Candidature Aird, R., Najman, J.M., and Mamun, A.A. Oral presentation entitled “Does church attendance or spiritual belief explain the association between religiosity and aggression?” International Conference of Interdisciplinary Social Sciences, Island of Rhodes, Greece 20 July, 2006. Aird, R., Najman, J.M., and Mamun, A.A. Oral presentation entitled “Differences in delusional ideation according to traditional and non-traditional spiritual beliefs: A longitudinal study.” World Psychiatric Association Congress, Istanbul, Turkey, 15 July, 2006. Aird, R., Najman, J.M., and Mamun, A.A. Poster presentation entitled “Institutionalised and privatised religion, spiritual belief, and the mental health and social behaviour of young adults.” The World Psychiatric Association Section of Epidemiology and Public Health Meeting, Brisbane, Australia, 5 – 7 July, 2005. vii Table of Contents Candidate’s Statement of Originality ..................................................................................... ii Acknowledgments ................................................................................................................. iii Abstract................................................................................................................................... v List of Presentations while undertaking Candidature........................................................... vii Table of Contents .......................................................................................viii List of Tables ........................................................................................................................ xii List of Abbreviations ........................................................................................................... xvi Chapter One: Introduction............................................................................ 1 The implications from conflating religion and spirituality............................................3 Traditional and non-traditional beliefs: a way of approaching the study of contemporary religiosity .................................................................................................5 The focus of the current study........................................................................................7 The significance of the current study........................................................................... 12 Chapter Two: The contemporary religious milieu ......................................15 Data related to religious affiliation and church attendance......................................... 15 Religious affiliation ........................................................................................................ 15 Church attendance........................................................................................................... 19 Traditional and non-traditional religious and spiritual beliefs .................................... 22 Traditional and alternative conceptions of the divine..................................................... 22 New Age beliefs and practices ..................................................................................... 25 Paranormal experiences and beliefs, and New Age beliefs ......................................... 29 Intergenerational change in religiosity ........................................................................ 31 The internet and religion and spirituality........................................................................ 32 Summary ....................................................................................................................... 34 Chapter Three: Theoretical perspectives on religion, spirituality, mental health and social behaviour......................................................................... 36 The religion-spirituality nexus ..................................................................................... 37 The New Spirituality .................................................................................................... 38 Sociological theories of religion, spirituality, mental health and social behaviour ..... 44 Durkheimian theory ........................................................................................................ 44 The evolution of religion from archaic times to the present........................................... 46 viii The process of secularisation and its influence on religion ............................................ 48 The conflict of modern culture ....................................................................................... 50 Theoretical framework for the current study .................................................................. 51 Psychological perspectives on religion and spirituality ............................................... 53 The individual approach to religion and spirituality....................................................... 53 Psychological perspectives on religion and mental health and social behaviour ........... 54 The organisational and religious beliefs components..................................................... 54 Spirituality and religion: the theoretical ‘crisis’ ............................................................. 58 Summary ....................................................................................................................... 63 Chapter Four: Evidence of relationships between religion, spirituality, and mental health and social behaviour ............................................................ 65 Section One: Research evidence pertaining to religiousness, spirituality, mental health, and social behaviour ......................................................................................... 66 Religion, spirituality, and mental health ......................................................................... 66 Religion, spirituality and delusional ideation ................................................................. 75 Religion, spirituality and social behaviour ..................................................................... 81 Summary of evidence related to religion and spirituality............................................... 83 Section Two: Research evidence using traditional measures of religion, mental health and social behaviour ..................................................................................................... 88 Religion and depression.................................................................................................. 90 Religion and anxiety ....................................................................................................... 92 Religion and delusional thoughts.................................................................................... 94 Religion and social behaviour......................................................................................... 95 Religious background and development......................................................................... 97 Summary of evidence related to religion ........................................................................ 98 The quality of evidence related to religion, spirituality, and mental health and social behaviour .................................................................................................................... 100 Chapter Five: Methodology........................................................................104 Methods ...................................................................................................................... 104 Participants.................................................................................................................... 104 Measures ....................................................................................................................... 105 Statistical analyses ........................................................................................................ 116 Attrition........................................................................................................................117 ix Chapter Six: Results....................................................................................122 Section One: Overview of young adult religiosity and religious background ........... 122 Young adult religiosity ................................................................................................. 122 Summary of findings on religiosity among young adults............................................. 126 Religious background and young adult religiosity ....................................................... 127 Summary of findings on religious background and young adult religiosity................. 137 Section Two: Religiosity and anxiety/depression ..................................................... 139 Young adult religiosity and anxiety/depression............................................................ 140 Religious background and anxiety/depression in young adulthood ............................. 143 Independent associations between non-traditional beliefs and anxiety/depression in young adulthood ........................................................................................................... 144 Summary of findings on young adult anxiety/depression ............................................ 145 Section 3: Religiosity and delusional ideation ........................................................... 146 Young adult religiosity and delusional ideation ........................................................... 146 Religious background and delusional ideation in young adulthood ............................. 154 Independent associations between religiosity, religious background, and delusional ideation in young adulthood ......................................................................................... 163 Summary of findings on young adult delusional ideation ............................................ 169 Section 4: Religiosity and antisocial behaviour...........................................................171 Young adult religiosity and antisocial behaviour ......................................................... 171 Religious background and antisocial behaviour in young adulthood ........................... 176 Independent associations between religiosity, religious background, and antisocial behaviour in young adulthood ...................................................................................... 177 Summary of findings on young adult antisocial behaviour .......................................... 181 Chapter Seven: Discussion .........................................................................183 Young adult religiosity ............................................................................................... 183 Religious background and young adult religiosity .................................................... 184 Anxiety/depression in young adulthood.................................................................... 187 Delusional ideation in young adulthood .................................................................... 195 Antisocial behaviour in young adulthood .................................................................. 200 Potential confounders: insight into the characteristics of those who endorse non- traditional religious/spiritual beliefs.......................................................................... 204 Summary ..................................................................................................................... 205 Limitations of the current study ................................................................................. 206 x Chapter Eight: Conclusion.........................................................................210 The study findings and their implications for future research .................................. 213 List of references.........................................................................................221 Appendices................................................................................................. 234 Appendix A: Domains of religion and spirituality ....................................................... 235 Appendix B: Summary of studies on religion and anxiety........................................... 236 Appendix C: Scales from the Young Adult Self Report............................................... 238 Appendix D: Scales from the Youth Self Report.......................................................... 239 Appendix E: Potential confounders for young adult religiosity ................................... 240 Appendix F: Potential confounders for anxiety/depression.......................................... 242 Appendix G: Potential confounders for delusional ideation......................................... 243 Appendix H: Potential confounders for externalising behaviour ................................. 244 xi List of Tables Table 1: Dimensions of spirituality investigated by the Australian 2002-03 Wellbeing and Security Study ........................................................................................................................ 70 Table 2: Summary of conceptual frameworks used to assess relationships between religiousness/spirituality and depression, anxiety, delusional ideation, and antisocial behaviour ................................................................................................................................ 87 Table 3: Results of principal components analysis on 21 items from PDI .......................... 109 Table 4: Maternal characteristics associated with loss to follow-up of the study children at 21 and 14 years post-delivery.................................................................................................... 118 Table 5: Maternal religiosity and loss to follow-up of the study children at 21 and 14 years post-delivery ......................................................................................................................... 119 Table 6: Belief in God among the study sample .................................................................. 123 Table 7: Belief in a spiritual or higher power other than God among the study sample...... 123 Table 8: Pattern of traditional and non-traditional beliefs among the study sample............ 124 Table 9: Young adult church attendance according to gender ............................................. 124 Table 10: Young adult traditional and non-traditional beliefs according to church attendance .............................................................................................................................................. 125 Table 11: Young adult prayer, religious rituals or other religious activities according to church attendance ................................................................................................................. 126 Table 12: Maternal belief in God and traditional beliefs in young adulthood ..................... 128 Table 13: Maternal belief in God and non-traditional beliefs in young adulthood .............. 129 Table 14: Maternal belief in God and church attendance in young adulthood..................... 130 Table 15: Maternal church attendance during childhood and traditional beliefs in young adulthood .............................................................................................................................. 131 Table 16: Maternal church attendance during childhood and non-traditional beliefs in young adulthood .............................................................................................................................. 132 Table 17: Maternal church attendance during childhood and young adult church attendance .............................................................................................................................................. 133 Table 18: Maternal religious affiliation at entry to the study and traditional beliefs in young adulthood .............................................................................................................................. 134 Table 19: Maternal religious affiliation at entry to the study and non-traditional beliefs in young adulthood ................................................................................................................... 136 xii Table 20: Maternal religious affiliation at entry to the study and church attendance in young adulthood .............................................................................................................................. 137 Table 21: Summary table of main associations found between religious background and young adult religiosity.......................................................................................................... 139 Table 22: Traditional beliefs and anxiety/depression among females and males in young adulthood .............................................................................................................................. 140 Table 23: Non-traditional beliefs and anxiety/depression among young adult females....... 141 Table 24: Non-traditional beliefs and anxiety/depression among young adult males.......... 142 Table 25: Church attendance and anxiety/depression among young adult females and males .............................................................................................................................................. 143 Table 26: Religious background and anxiety/depression among young adult females and males..................................................................................................................................... 144 Table 27: Summary table of main associations found between religiosity and young adult anxiety/depression ................................................................................................................ 145 Table 28: Traditional beliefs and disturbed, suspicious, and paranormal ideation among young adults.......................................................................................................................... 146 Table 29: Traditional beliefs and total PDI scores among young adults.............................. 147 Table 30: Non-traditional beliefs and disturbed ideation among young adults.................... 148 Table 31: Non-traditional beliefs and suspiciousness among young adults......................... 149 Table 32: Non-traditional beliefs and paranormal ideation among young adults ................ 150 Table 33: Non-traditional beliefs and religious ideation among young adults..................... 151 Table 34: Non-traditional beliefs and total PDI scores among young adults....................... 152 Table 35: Young adult church attendance and disturbed ideation, suspiciousness, and high total PDI scores..................................................................................................................... 153 Table 36: Young adult church attendance and paranormal ideation .................................... 153 Table 37: Young adult church attendance and religious ideation ........................................ 154 Table 38: Maternal belief in God and disturbed, suspicious, and paranormal ideation, and high total PDI scores in young adulthood ............................................................................ 155 Table 39: Maternal belief in God and religious ideation in young adulthood...................... 156 Table 40: Maternal church attendance and disturbed, suspicious, and paranormal ideation, and total PDI scores in young adulthood.............................................................................. 157 Table 41: Maternal church attendance and religious ideation in young adulthood.............. 158 Table 42: Maternal religious affiliation and disturbed, suspicious, and paranormal ideation in young adulthood ................................................................................................................... 159 xiii Table 43: Maternal religious affiliation and religious ideation in young adulthood ............ 161 Table 44: Maternal religious affiliation and total PDI scores in young adulthood .............. 162 Table 45: Independent associations between maternal and young adult church attendance, maternal belief in God, and religious ideation in young adulthood ..................................... 165 Table 46: Independent associations between maternal religious affiliation and religious ideation in young adulthood ................................................................................................. 166 Table 47: Independent associations between young adult beliefs, maternal religious affiliation and total PDI scores ............................................................................................. 168 Table 48: Summary of main findings for associations between young adult religiosity, religious background, and delusional ideation ..................................................................... 170 Table 49: Traditional beliefs and antisocial behaviour among young adult females ........... 172 Table 50: Traditional beliefs and antisocial behaviour among young adult males .............. 172 Table 51: Non-traditional beliefs and antisocial behaviour among young adult females .... 173 Table 52: Non-traditional beliefs and antisocial behaviour among young adult males ....... 174 Table 53: Church attendance and antisocial behaviour among young adult females........... 175 Table 54: Church attendance and antisocial behaviour among young adult males.............. 175 Table 55: Religious background and antisocial behaviour among young adult females and males..................................................................................................................................... 177 Table 56: Independent association between traditional beliefs and female antisocial behaviour .............................................................................................................................. 178 Table 57: Independent association between non-traditional beliefs and female antisocial behaviour .............................................................................................................................. 179 Table 58: Independent association between non-traditional beliefs and male antisocial behaviour .............................................................................................................................. 180 Table 59: Independent association between church attendance and antisocial behaviour among young adult males ..................................................................................................... 181 Table 60: Summary table of main associations found between religiosity and young adult externalising behaviour......................................................................................................... 182 Table A: Domains of religion/spirituality identified by the United States National Institute of Healthcare Research ............................................................................................................. 235 Table B: Summary of studies examined in Shreve-Neiger’s and Edelstein’s (2004) review of the literature on religion and anxiety.................................................................................... 236 Table C1: Items included in the YASR anxiety/depression subscale .................................. 238 Table C2: Items contained in the YASR externalising scale................................................ 238 xiv Table D: Items contained in the scales from the Youth Self Report .................................... 239 Table E1: Potential confounders of associations between religious background and young adult belief in God ................................................................................................................ 240 Table E2: Potential confounders of associations between religious background and young adult belief in a spiritual or higher power other than God.................................................... 240 Table E3: Potential confounders of associations between religious background and young adult church attendance ........................................................................................................ 241 Table F: Potential confounders of associations between young adult religiosity and anxiety/depression ................................................................................................................ 242 Table G1: Potential confounders of associations between religious background and religious ideation ................................................................................................................................. 243 Table G2: Potential confounders of associations between young adult religiosity and total PDI scores............................................................................................................................. 243 Table H1: Potential confounders of associations between young adult religiosity variables and externalising behaviour.................................................................................................. 244 Table H2: Potential confounders of associations between religious background and young adult externalising behaviour................................................................................................ 244 xv List of Abbreviations ABS Australian Bureau of Statistics ACS Australian Community Survey Adj OR Adjusted odds ratios ARDA Association of Religion Data Archives ARIS American Religious Identification Survey ASCRG Australian Standard Classification of Religious Groups CI Confidence intervals ESP Extra-sensory perception GSS General Social Survey NCLS National Church Life Survey, Australia NIHR National Institute of Health Research, United States of America NRM New religious movement OT Occupational therapist PDI Peters et al. Delusional Inventory R/S Religious/spiritual SF-12 12-Item Short Form Health Survey S/HP Spiritual or higher power SS Subjective spirituality TR Tradition-oriented religiosity Unadj OR Unadjusted odds ratios xvi Chapter One: Introduction In recent years, there has been a substantial rise in interest in spirituality within the fields of psychology and psychiatry. A search conducted on the PsychInfo database for peer-reviewed journal articles containing the word spirituality, or a related term (using the keyword spiritual*) indicates that the number of journal publications related to this topic since 2000 to August 2006 (6357) has almost doubled those published during the previous 107 years between 1893 and 1999 (3349)1. Since spirituality has only recently gained attention as a specific object of enquiry within the study of religion and health, there is only a limited amount of empirical literature examining connections between spirituality or religion/spirituality, and mental health and social behaviour. Findings to date are inconsistent, showing spirituality (or religion/spirituality) as having positive (Baetz, Griffin, Bowen, Koenig, & Marcoux, 2004; Kaldor, Hughes, Castle, & Bellamy, 2004; Saucier & Skrzypinska, 2006), negative (Corrigan, McCorkle, Schell, & Kidder, 2003; Davis, Kerr, & Kurpius, 2003; Good & Willoughby, 2006; Koenig, Cohen, Blazer, Pieper, Meador, Shelp et al., 1992; Pearce, Little, & Perez, 2003; Resnick, Harris, & Blum, 1993; Wright, Frost, & Wisecarver, 1993), and no associations (Corrigan, McCorkle, Schell et al., 2003; Good & Willoughby, 2006; Kaldor, Hughes, Castle et al., 2004; Wink, Dillon, & Larsen, 2005), with a range of mental health and behavioural outcomes. Interpreting this evidence is fraught with difficulties however, since close inspection reveals that the conceptualisations of spirituality that have been used thus far vary considerably across studies and often involve the conflation of religion and spirituality. This raises issues in regard to the legitimacy of findings being attributed to a phenomenon termed ‘spirituality’. Even the idea that there is some singular phenomenon that can be labelled spirituality is a dubious proposition, given the disparate meanings ascribed to this term within the research community and the general population alike. Moreover, a number of literature reviews published recently on religiousness/spirituality have relied heavily on findings from journal articles that report observed associations between religion and mental health outcomes, with no spirituality concept being evident in either the methodology or discussion sections of the research papers under review. George and colleagues (2000:107) emphasise that the bulk of extant literature on “spirituality and health” are based on measures of religion rather than spirituality. The lack of clarity in what is actually being referred to when the terms “spirituality”, “religion”, and “religiousness” are used, raises numerous theoretical and 1 Search conducted on Thursday 24 August, 2006. 1 substantive issues in regard to making determinations about the potential benefits or harms that might be associated with forms of religiosity that exist in today’s world. One major contributor to the difficulties encountered in differentiating spirituality from religion is the fact that these terms tended to be used interchangeably prior to recent times (George, Larson, Koenig et al., 2000). The changing religious landscape over recent decades has however, given cause for reappraising how these terms are each perceived and conceived. The terms “spiritual” and “spirituality” are now embraced widely within both secular and non- secular contexts (Bash, 2004), giving rise to much debate about what these terms really mean and the extent that they need to (or can) be differentiated from religion and religiousness. Even though considerable efforts have been made to define spirituality and religion in such a way that distinguishes one from the other, a conceptual overlap persists between them. As a consequence, it is not surprising that few studies have investigated spirituality as a concept that is separate from religion (see Good & Willoughby, 2006; Kaldor, Hughes, Castle et al., 2004; Saucier & Skrzypinska, 2006). Other researchers (like Baetz, Griffin, Bowen et al., 2004; Baetz, Larson, Marcoux, Bowen, & Griffin, 2002) have simply used measures that conflate spirituality and religion (or religiousness) and reported their findings as being attributable to “religiousness/spirituality”. While the latter approach may have been adopted as a means of bypassing the manifold problems associated with distinguishing spirituality from religion (or religiousness) or alternatively, because researchers have decided that the two terms refer to a single phenomenon or very similar phenomena, it nonetheless fails to consider fundamental differences between forms of religiosity that remain rooted in traditional religious thought and those that are not. In particular, the conflation of religion and spirituality ignores observations of the term “spiritual” being purposely used as a self-descriptor by those who wish to distance themselves from organised religion and its associated doctrine and dogma (see Possamai, 2000). Likewise, substantial proportions of populations in Western countries now appear to reject a traditional belief in God as the divine being and instead conceive the divine as a depersonalised being that takes the form of some sort of spiritual or higher power or force (Association of Religion Data Archives, 2001; Francis & Kaldor, 2002; Houtman & Mascini, 2002; Kelley & De Graff, 1997). Moreover, churchgoers and non-churchgoers alike have been observed to endorse non- traditional conceptions of the divine (Possamai, 2000; Woodhead, 1993), undermining the legitimacy of participation in religious services being taken to indicate a traditional religious orientation. The recent tendency for researchers to use self-identification with the term 2 “religious/spiritual” as a measure from which to base investigations into health outcomes is particularly problematic, since it serves to collapse those with disparate belief systems and practices into a single category. People are known to identify with the terms “religious” and “spiritual” in disparate ways, with some describing themselves as being “religious but not spiritual”, others as “spiritual but not religious”, and still others as “religious and spiritual” (Zinnbauer, Pargament, Cole, Rye, Butter, Belavich et al., 1997). These contrasting self- descriptions reflect divergent religious/spiritual beliefs, attitudes and practices (Taylor, Mitchell, Kenan, & Tacker, 2000; Zinnbauer, Pargament, Cole et al., 1997; Zinnbauer, Pargament, & Scott, 1999). Thus, the conflation of religion and spirituality for research purposes, assigns discrepant practices, behaviours and attitudes, and opposing belief systems into a single heterogeneous group. The implications of this conceptual approach require serious consideration. The implications from conflating religion and spirituality The conflation of religion and spirituality has at least two major implications for the interpretation of research evidence showing relationships between these phenomena and human health. Firstly, this approach groups together two contrasting forms of religiosity that have been identified by numerous authors as “religious” spirituality and “non-religious” spirituality (see for example Bash, 2004; Van Ness, 1996; Woodhead, 1993), though the boundary that exists between them is somewhat blurred. Participation in activities run by religious organisations cannot be assumed to represent “religious spirituality”, because some church attendees describe themselves as being “spiritual but not religious” (Roof, 1993; Zinnbauer, Pargament, Cole et al., 1997). Moreover, varieties of spirituality that are deemed to be “non-religious” by virtue of their lack of connection to services run by religious institutions, may still involve endorsement of core religious values and beliefs that are traditional in nature, and thus be more religious in orientation than they are non-religious. Non-involvement with religious organisations does not equate to non-belief in God or the rejection of values promoted by religious organisations. Conflated measures of religiousness/spirituality therefore serve to group an unknown number of variant forms of religiosity encompassing: those that maintain ties to traditional religion, through the holding of core religious beliefs and values; those that are highly individualised and diverse in regard to beliefs, practices, values, and behaviours; those linked to New Religious Movements (NRMs); as well as those that involve regular participation in religious services and adherence to Church doctrine, and those that also involve regular attendance at religious services, but which encompass beliefs and practices that deviate from religious tradition. Indeed, it is unknown 3 how many different beliefs and practices might be included within the so-called ‘non-religious’ variety of spirituality, since spirituality is a term that is embraced within contexts as diverse as the New Age, Human Potential and Deep Ecology movements, native, pagan, and various Eastern religions, black and ethnic groups, feminist spirituality (Woodhead, 1993), and twelve- step programs (Zinnbauer, Pargament, & Scott, 1999). How then does one interpret evidence arising from all these divergent forms of religiosity being amassed within a single category “religiousness/spirituality”? Secondly, if a study finds that a single measure of religiousness/spirituality is positively or negatively related to a particular mental health outcome, how is this association to be explained? In 1997, the National Institute of Healthcare Research (NIHR) in the United States convened a panel to review the accumulated evidence on spirituality and health. This panel identified ten domains of religion and/or spirituality for which there was “at least minimal evidence of links to health” (George, Larson, Koenig et al., 2000:105). These domains pertain to religious preference or affiliation, history, participation, private practices, support, coping, beliefs and values, commitment, motivation for regulating or reconciling relationships, and experiences (see Appendix A). While the identification of these domains is useful for classifying evidence, it does not progress understanding of whether or not the mechanisms that are involved in the religion-mental health relationship are the same as those involved in the spirituality-mental health relationship. Any assumption that religion and spirituality have the same relationship with mental health as one another ignores fundamental differences between religious and non-religious varieties of spirituality. Findings from studies that have used conflated measures of religiousness/spirituality necessarily rest on the summed effect of mechanisms related to religiousness and to spirituality, with no clarity being gained as to whether the mechanisms involved for these variants of religiosity are the same, similar or in direct contrast to one another. Thus, singular measures of “religiousness/spirituality” hold little capacity to further our understanding of whether or not different forms of religiosity moderate mental health and social behaviour in different ways. By contrast, attention to whether religious/spiritual beliefs are traditional or non- traditional in nature serves to differentiate those who maintain beliefs that are rooted in religious tradition from those that deviate from traditional religious thought. This approach is being used in this thesis since it provides an opportunity to compare health outcomes according to two contrasting belief systems – systems of belief that have implications for the way people negotiate their daily lives. 4 Traditional and non-traditional beliefs: a way of approaching the study of contemporary religiosity Traditional and non-traditional religious/spiritual beliefs imply disparate worldviews. On the one hand, a belief in God represents a belief that is a central feature of Christian traditions (and of various non-Christian traditions). On the other hand, a non-traditional conception of the divine as some sort of depersonalised spiritual or higher power or force represents a clear departure from traditional religious doctrine. This alternative conception of the divine is characteristic of the New Spirituality, a term proposed by Linda Woodhead (1993) to refer to a range of beliefs and practices that have emerged through the activities of New Age movement. The New Spirituality and its key features are discussed at length in Chapter Three. The importance of how the sacred is conceived by individuals is highlighted by Silberman (2005:646) who argues that people’s conceptions of the sacred help determine the way they perceive themselves, others, their society, and the cosmos. While traditional religions conceive God to be the Ultimate authority and emphasises moral duty and social obligation within their doctrines, the New Spirituality rejects traditional notions of God as the Supreme Being and emphasises an individualistic approach to life, by promoting the idea that authority over moral decision making and determinations about Ultimate truth are the rightful preserve of the individual (Woodhead, 1993). Even though the New Spirituality emphasises the “connectedness” of all things, the individual is conceived to be engaged in a solitary spiritual journey (Woodhead, 1993). These two contrasting ideologies are likely to give rise to differences in the way people perceive themselves, others and society in general, which may in turn translate to differential outcomes in terms of both mental health and social behaviour. Alternative conceptions of the divine represent the development of a new form of religiosity within the West, even though it lacks a clear and easily identifiable structure, membership, common doctrine or set of practices. Despite the conceptual difficulties that surround attempts to differentiate this new form of religiosity as a discrete entity, the proportions of populations that now endorse alternative conceptions of the divine (Association of Religion Data Archives, 2001; Francis & Kaldor, 2002; Houtman & Mascini, 2002; Kelley & De Graff, 1997) suggest a widespread shift in religious thought on a massive scale within the West that demands empirical attention for any connection it might have with human wellbeing. Attention to belief in God and alternative conceptions of the divine provides a clear demarcation between varieties of spirituality that maintain ties with traditional religion and those that differ from religious tradition at a fundamental level. This approach serves to bypass the conceptual overlap that currently exists between the concepts “religion” 5 and “spirituality”, and thus holds potential as a means to differentiate those with a traditional religious orientation from those whose beliefs are aligned with the New Spirituality. While there is clearly a need to investigate whether traditional and non-traditional forms of religiosity are differentially related to mental health and social behaviour, it cannot be assumed than any differential relationships that might be observed are directly related to traditional and non-traditional religious/spiritual beliefs themselves. It may be that religious influences operating during the developing years help determine the uptake of traditional or non-traditional religious/spiritual beliefs in the first instance, and that these influences are more strongly linked to mental health and social behaviour in adulthood, than are the religious/spiritual beliefs and practices of individuals once they reach adulthood. No single study appears to have examined the relative contributions of traditional and non-traditional religious/spiritual beliefs, church attendance, and religious background to health outcomes thus far, and this thesis seeks to fill this gap in the literature. Since there is currently little consensus about the meaning of the terms religiosity, religion, and spirituality, it is important to identify how these terms are conceived for the purposes of this thesis before outlining the objectives of the current study. Firstly, religiosity is conceived to a generic term that refers to the beliefs, activities, and commitment associated with the search for the sacred. This definition captures all those who derive ultimate meaning from something beyond everyday mundane experience, regardless of whether this meaning is derived from a belief in God or some alternative belief in a universal force, power, energy, spirit, forces of nature, or abstract concept such as love. Spirituality is conceived to refer to “the human dimension that transcends the biological, psychological, and social aspects of living” (Mauritzen, 1988:118) and “whatever people do to attain a variety of goals, such as meaning in life, wholeness, interconnections with others, truth, and one’s own inner potential” (Zinnbauer, Pargament, & Scott, 1999:902). Religion is conceived as “a system of beliefs in a divine or superhuman power, and the practices of worship or other rituals directed towards such a power” (Argyle & Beit-Hallahmi, 1975:1). Spirituality is thus differentiated from religion by being a broader concept that does not rely on notions of divinity or particular practices such as worship or rituals. The descriptor religious/spiritual is now commonly used as an umbrella term that encompasses both religion and spirituality, and its acronym “R/S” is used throughout the remainder of this thesis. 6 The focus of the current study This study has multiple objectives. The meeting of these objectives has the potential to further understanding of the extent that R/S factors are linked to mental health and social behaviour in young adulthood, and to inform theory building in the area of religion, spirituality, and health. This study takes a sociological approach, using data derived from a large young adult sample, to answer the following four research questions: (1) Do significant associations exist between measures of religious background in an individual’s early years (including maternal belief in God, maternal frequency of church attendance, and maternal religious affiliation) and traditional and non-traditional R/S beliefs and frequency of church attendance in young adulthood? (2) Are indicators of young adult religiosity (traditional and non-traditional R/S beliefs, and frequency of church attendance) and religious background (maternal belief in God, maternal frequency of church attendance, and maternal religious affiliation) differentially associated with young adult anxiety and depression? (3) Are indicators of young adult religiosity and religious background differentially related to delusional ideation in young adulthood? (4) Are indicators of young adult religiosity and religious background differentially associated with externalising behaviour (measuring intrusive, aggressive and delinquent behaviour) in young adulthood? Examination of the extent that maternal religiosity predicts offspring religiosity will allow determinations to be made about the extent that religious influences operating during the developing years might steer young people towards traditional or non-traditional R/S beliefs, and attending church services in young adulthood (research question 1). Attention to young adult religiosity and religious background, and their respective associations with young adult mental health and behavioural outcomes (research questions 2, 3 and 4) facilitates examination of two different approaches to the divine and the disparate worldviews each implies, as well as current involvement with traditional religious organisations and religious background, for their connections with three domains of mental health. Two of these domains involve outcomes of interest that figure prominently within the extant literature on religion/spirituality and mental health, namely affective disorders and antisocial behaviour. Attention to the other domain, 7 delusional ideation, normally investigated within the field of psychiatry, provides a means to assess the patterns of thinking that are associated with religious background, contrasting R/S beliefs, and church attendance. Members of new religious movements (NRMs) have been found to have high levels of delusional ideation and there have been calls for more research in this area in order to determine whether new forms of religiosity give rise to idiosyncratic beliefs or vice versa (see Peters, Day, McKenna, & Orbach, 1999). Together, these three domains provide an opportunity to investigate connections between religion and spirituality, and important indicators of mental, emotional and behavioural wellbeing within a contemporary Western setting. In order to give context to the objectives of the current study, Chapter Two provides a detailed account of empirical evidence related to religious affiliation, church attendance, religious and spiritual beliefs and practices (including those that are “New Age”) and paranormal beliefs and experiences. The bulk of this evidence is based on populations within the United States and Australia, but also includes empirical data gathered in the United Kingdom, Canada, the Netherlands, and cross-nationally. The content of Chapter Two serves to highlight the complex nature of the contemporary religious milieu. Attention to this body of evidence is necessary to identify why traditional measures of religion alone, such as religious affiliation and church attendance, as well as single measures of religiousness/spirituality, have little capacity to further our understanding of the nature of religiosity as it exists today, or its connection with mental health. The emergent patterns of beliefs and practices identified in Chapter Two suggest the need for innovative approaches to the study of religion and spirituality, so that insight can be gained about the potential benefits and harms that might be associated with disparate forms of contemporary religiosity in the West. Subsequently, Chapter Three focuses on the religion-spirituality nexus so that the connections and disconnections between these two concepts are understood, before giving detailed attention to the New Spirituality and its characteristics. Theoretical perspectives that are related to religion, spirituality, mental health and social behaviour are then outlined so as to highlight the theoretical underpinnings of the current study. Towards the end of Chapter Three, some discussion is devoted to current debates within the study of religion and health, since these have direct bearing on the methodological approach used in this thesis and the implications of its findings. The empirical literature pertaining to spirituality and religion, and anxiety, depression, antisocial behaviour and delusional ideation is reviewed in Chapter Four, and serves to highlight that much of the available empirical literature rests on investigations into religion and 8 not spirituality. Chapter Four also identifies that the majority of studies into religion rely on data gathered one or more decades ago and do not consider those within the population whose style of religiosity falls outside a traditional religious purview; raising doubts about their relevance to a contemporary context. The methodological approach being used in the current study is discussed in Chapter Five. Findings from this research are reported in the results section, Chapter Six. The results and limitations of this study are discussed in Chapter Seven. Finally, Chapter Eight focuses on the implications of these findings for theory building and future research in the area of religion and spirituality. My personal experience of religion and spirituality has informed the design and aims of the current study, as well as the interpretation of findings from my research. Thus, a brief outline of this experience is provided below, as a means of identifying my personal interest in the current investigation. I describe myself as an agnostic; though this description fails to capture the influence that religion and spirituality have both had on me over the course of my life. My father was an atheist and religion seemed to play little part in his upbringing or the lives of his family of origin. By contrast, my maternal grandfather was a Lutheran pastor. He died the year before my birth, but the Church remained of central importance in my grandmother’s life and her influence largely determined my mother’s involvement in the church up to her fifties, and that of my siblings and me during our developing years. After leaving my family home in 1974, my involvement with mainstream religious institutions was restricted to attending weddings, funerals, and the occasional baptism, at an assortment of Catholic and Protestant churches, and attendance at some Jewish celebrations. Despite my mother’s strict Lutheran background, her interest in things religious extended well beyond church teachings and she gathered an extensive range of books related to mysticism, spirituality, and the occult from around the time of the late 1940s to the present. She was actively involved in various spiritual and spiritualist groups in the 1960s, and attended a wide range of seminars and lectures provided by organisations and individuals associated with the alternative health, New Age and Human Potential movements from the 1970s onwards. Having read some of my mother’s books in the early 1970s, I became interested in spirituality, since it seemed to offer a way of understanding life and its purpose, that was unconstrained by religious doctrine and dogma, and which seemed to me to be free of the bigotry, narrowness of thought and vision, and out- dated and meaningless rituals that I perceived to be characteristic of mainstream religion at that time. In particular, spirituality seemed to represent a belief system that promoted inclusiveness rather than exclusiveness, since it did not appear to sentence anyone to “eternal 9 damnation and hell-fire” or stereotype others because of their beliefs, practices, culture, class, gender, or behaviour. My marriage to a New Age/Human potential entrepreneur in 1978 exposed me to a wide range of groups and individuals working within the alternative health, New Age, and Human Potential movements in Australia, the United States, and the United Kingdom. It also placed me in the position where I had to entertain international speakers and authors working within these movements in our home during their speaking tours in Brisbane. By the early 1980s, I had growing concerns that these three movements together (arguably a single movement since they appear to be strongly intertwined) actually represented a new form of “religion” that had its own forms of religious authority, doctrine, and dogma. Rather than resting on traditions based on a set of moral values and rules for behaviour modelled on some exceptional and outstanding human being and their demonstrated wisdom, compassion, sense of justice, empathy and understanding however, this new religious form seemed to borrow at will from multiple religious traditions, as well as from the field of psychology. Beliefs and practices taken from Jungian theory, Freudian theory, cognitive-behaviour theory, and Maslow’s theory of the hierarchy of needs also featured within this eclectic mix. Moreover, this borrowing from different religious traditions meant that no single tradition was adopted in its entirety. Particular beliefs and practices appeared to be selected from a range of traditions and embraced for either a short or a long period, with these often being replaced by other beliefs and practices, according to what individuals perceived to be relevant to their spiritual growth at a given stage. While this new form of “religion” certainly seemed to me to lack any formal, unified organisational structure or leadership, it nevertheless had its own form of hierarchy. I witnessed the development of many centres and groups, with a range of individuals achieving leadership status by promoting their own brand of “spirituality”, “truth”, and means and methods for gaining self-enlightenment, healing, a sense of connection with the universe, and/or “wholeness”. These individual leaders commonly used personal stories of triumph over adversity (such as chronic illness, cancer, disability, poverty, depression, anxiety, loss of a loved one, victimisation, and so on) to support claims that their “means and methods” really “work”. Despite the apparent differences between the means, methods and objectives promoted by individuals and their followers, “spirituality”, “finding inner truth”, “unlocking inner potential” or some variant term or phrase appeared to be common parlance. The terms “non-denominational” and “non-religious” were also used intermittently to assure the anti- religious within audiences that their involvement was in no way connected to any mainstream 10 religion. Few leaders or followers seemed to self-identify with the term “New Age” directly, with many actually distancing themselves from the New Age movement and choosing instead to describe themselves as “spiritual, but not religious”. Even though various authors have identified the New Spirituality as portraying human beings in an optimistic fashion, my observation has been that there is a tendency for those involved in this “new religion” to demonise others by labelling them “non-spiritual”, “unenlightened”, “negative” or “driven by personality and not spirituality” – thus giving rise to a new form of prejudice and bigotry. It also became obvious to me in the early 1980s that this new “religion” involved the “selling” of spiritual beliefs, practices, and transcendent experiences, for personal profit and the amassing of substantial personal wealth. While mainstream religious institutions have been criticised for their capacity to accumulate wealth, the New Age/Human Potential/alternative health movement/s appeared to give individuals the opportunity to gain considerable financial profit from their activities. My experiences suggested to me that the rise of the New Age, Human Potential, and alternative health “movements” represented a groundswell attempt to overthrow mainstream values and traditions for an alternative utopian ideal, and that many of those involved were fast becoming the subject of their own critique. Champions of the “new way of being and living” and their followers seemed to me to be little different to those they sought to depose, with the seeking of power and wealth figuring just as strongly in this new approach to living, as it did the “old”. In addition, these new shared beliefs appeared to be instrumental in creating fertile ground for forms of inner turmoil and social conflict that appeared in essence, little different to those often attributed to the machinations of mainstream religion by anti-religionists, and to society more broadly by those who take an anti-establishment approach to mainstream authority, hierarchy, rules and regulations. Robert Bellah (1970:44) argued more than three decades ago that the chief characteristic of the modern religious situation is that “culture and personality themselves have come to be viewed as endlessly revisable”. He foresaw this newfound freedom from the constraints imposed by religious doctrine, as giving rise to enormous possibilities for both “pathological distortion”, and “unprecedented opportunities for creative innovation in every sphere of human action” (Bellah, 1970:44). In agreement with Bellah’s prediction, my interest in studying religion and spirituality is to explore how and why these contrasting trajectories are set in motion. The current investigation has the potential to contribute to the study of religion and spirituality in several important ways, and these are identified in the following discussion. 11 The significance of the current study This study addresses several key issues identified repeatedly within the academic literature as creating ongoing difficulties for those attempting to interpret research evidence related to religion and spirituality. Firstly, the current study takes an approach that differentiates individuals according to the nature of their R/S beliefs and thus avoids the conceptual problems associated with the constructs religiousness and spirituality. Secondly, few recent studies of religion and spirituality have had access to longitudinal data from which to assess whether individuals’ current religiosity is more or less salient than religious background to mental health and behavioural outcomes. This study has the capacity to examine both current religiosity and religious background and thus allows comparison of their connections to these outcomes from data gathered cross-sectionally and longitudinally. Thirdly, the use of cross-sectional and longitudinal data from a large community sample allows examination of the extent that young adult demographic and health-related behaviours, prior mental health and behavioural problems, as well as family socio-demographics confound any observed associations between traditional and non-traditional R/S beliefs, frequency of church attendance, and mental health and social behaviour in young adulthood. The capacity of this study to control for the influence of prior mental health and behavioural problems allows inferences to be drawn about the direction of any associations found between R/S beliefs and mental health and social behaviour in young adulthood, although these inferences necessarily remain tentative. The heavy reliance on cross-sectional data among previous studies that have examined religion and spirituality and mental health outcomes precludes determinations being made as to whether or not observed associations might be causal in nature – leaving the puzzle of whether mental or emotional problems precede or follow particular R/S beliefs and practices unresolved. In addition, previous studies have rarely used large community samples that involve a cohort of female and male young adults in order to examine associations between religiosity and mental health and social behaviour. Evidence from many studies that examine religion and spirituality is based on biased samples, such as undergraduate students or convenient samples from religious settings. This study can thus make a valuable contribution to the empirical literature on religiosity, and mental health and social behaviour for the early adult stage of the life course. Fourthly, this study holds potential to inform the way educators, researchers, medical practitioners, psychiatrists, and community members conceive religion and spirituality. 12 Zinnbauer (1999:902) notes that both popular and scientific writings appear to be crediting spirituality as embodying the “highest in human potential and the loftier side of life”, while religiousness is “denigrated as mundane faith or as institutional hindrances to these potentials”. This tendency to see spirituality in a positive light and religiousness as a negative influence is curious, given that there is no consensus as to how religiousness or spirituality should be defined or how they differ from one another (Hill, Pargament, Hood Jr, McCullough, Swyers, Larson et al., 2000; Zinnbauer, Pargament, & Scott, 1999). Thus definitional problems alone undermine the legitimacy of regarding spirituality as “good” and religion as “bad”, before even considering the available evidence related to these subjects. Since the current study investigates two different belief systems and does not use a conflated measure of religiousness/spirituality, it has the potential to detect differential outcomes according to contrasting conceptions of the divine and provide some insight about whether a “non-religious” spiritual approach is connected to better or worse outcomes than a traditional religious/spiritual approach. Thus, the findings may provide grounds for people to re-assess any preconceptions they hold about the “goodness” of spirituality and “badness” of religion, and raise awareness that conceiving them as dichotomous entities is an overly simplistic conceptual approach to complex phenomena. Finally, juxtaposed with the polarisation of views about religion and spirituality described above, the religious and spiritual beliefs of patients are now being promoted as an aspect that psychiatrists and other clinicians need to consider when devising treatment plans for their patients (Blass, 2001; Koenig & Larson, 2001). Religion and spirituality already feature in medical practitioner training curricula in the United States (see Larson, Larson, & Koenig, 2001:9). Given that there is currently little empirical literature that directly compares the mental health of those with traditional religious beliefs with those who embrace non- traditional beliefs, clinicians currently have a poor evidence base from which they can gain insight about the potential benefits or harms to mental health that might be associated with non-traditional belief systems. In addition, the nature of the contemporary religious milieu is so complex that educators and clinicians alike may find it difficult to comprehend the diverse religious/spiritual beliefs and practices that are currently endorsed among the general population that may well be influencing patient compliance with treatment and patient recovery. The current study offers an avenue for assessing outcomes for those who endorse beliefs that are characteristic of New Age thought and embraced by numerous spiritual groups, organisations, and individuals. The findings will serve to increase the body of evidence related to religiosity and mental health within a contemporary setting and may thus assist 13 clinicians in making determinations about the potential benefits and harms associated with new forms of religiosity when dealing with their patients. The following chapter highlights that non-traditional forms of religiosity are now commonplace and therefore require due attention in investigations examining connections between religion, spirituality, and mental health. 14 Chapter Two: The contemporary religious milieu The unprecedented shift in religious belief and practice in recent decades within Western societies, is clearly visible and has led to the development of a religious milieu that is difficult to either describe or explain. Changing patterns in religious affiliation with Christian and non-Christian denominations, differential patterns of participation in church or religious activities between mainstream Christian and Charismatic churches, the use of the term “spirituality” as a substitute word for “religion” in both secular and religious contexts, as well as increasing levels of privatised religion, have given rise to the circumstance where traditional measures such as religious affiliation and church attendance are rendered all but useless in distinguishing the ‘religious’ from the ‘non-religious’. New approaches to the study of contemporary religiosity are therefore needed if its connection to population wellbeing is to be properly understood. Attention to available data on religious affiliation and church attendance, as well as that related to contemporary conceptions of the divine, New Age beliefs and practices, and paranormal beliefs lends support to this argument. Data related to religious affiliation and church attendance Religious affiliation Australia is described by Bouma (1998:203) as “one of the most culturally and religiously diverse nations in the world” and he notes that apart from Aboriginal religions, most religions in Australia originated in other countries, and any new religions in Australia are the result of cultural diffusion – the process by which beliefs, values and practices originating in one place and time are adopted at other places in time. Upon comparing the various categories of religion identified within the Australian Standard Classification of Religious Groups (ASCRG) in 1991 and in 1996 (ABS, 1996), it becomes clear that the religious landscape in Australia is increasingly diverse. A number of religious classifications that existed in 1991 have now been sub-classified into multiple categories, and new religions have been included in the 1996 system of classification. The singular categories for Churches of Christ, Apostolic Church, United Pentecostal Church, Christian Revival Crusade, and Macedonian have each been subdivided into two separate categories, the singular categories Congregational, Assyrian Church of the East, Reformed, Unity and Worldwide Church of God further subdivided into three separate categories, other Oriental Christians and other Orthodox into four separate categories, other Pentecostal churches into five separate categories, other Protestant into six separate categories, and other Christian into nine separate categories. The other Non-Christian 15 category now comprises 14 separate classifications, including Hinduism, Confucianism, Taoism, Shinto, Tenrikyo, Druidism, Wiccan/Witchcraft, Nature religions, Zoroastrianism, Satanism and several sub-categories of religion that were inadequately described on census forms. The 1991 category of Inadequately Described has been broken down into nine separate classifications including Christianity, Reformed, Rhema Family Church, Ancestor Veneration, Spiritualism, Theism, Eckankar, Religious Belief, and Humanist/Materialist, which is sub- divided into three sub-categories including no religion, Humanism, and Rationalism. There are now 107 separate religious affiliation classifications within the 1996 version of the ASCRG (ABS, 1996). In Australia between 1963 and 1971, the proportion of Australians stating an affiliation to some type of religion remained stable at slightly less than 90 per cent, declined by 1976 to 80 per cent, and in 2001, 74 per cent of Australians aged 18 and over reported being affiliated with a religion. Between 1971 and 2001, those affiliated with Christianity fell from 86 per cent to 68 per cent while those affiliating with non-Christian religions rose from 1 to 5 per cent, predominantly due to increases in affiliation with Buddhism, Islam and Hinduism (ABS, 2003). While the non-Christian religions only account for a small percentage of religious affiliation overall, it is clear that those affiliated with non-Christian religions is on the increase. In 2001, Wiccan/Witchcraft accounted for the highest proportion of adherents (18.5%) within the Other Non-Christian category (including those who adequately described their religion), followed by Shinto (12.1%), Druidism (8.3%), Taoism (5.1%), and Nature Religions and Satanism each ranking fifth at 4.9 per cent (ABS, 2003). ABS census data cannot be relied upon however to provide a comprehensive and “true” picture of the diverse range of religions and new religious groups and organisations with which Australians identify. The ASCRG must necessarily limit the number of separate categories of religion listed and thus existing categories represent to some degree, bureaucratic decisions about what does and does not constitute a bona fide “religion”. ABS data are also subject to different types of error. For example, the numbers reported by the ABS under the Pentecostal churches category from the 2001 Census were mistakenly included in the “Other Christian” group due to an oversight in census processing, thus inflating the totals for this category and underestimating the Pentecostalists within Australia by 75,220 (ABS, 2002). The ABS (2002) confirms having amended this error. It is also unclear what religious affiliation actually means for respondents when they identify with a particular religion. Do they report affiliation with a given denomination based on the religion of their family of origin, on baptismal or confirmation history, or on belief systems that actually steer their moral decisions 16 and behaviour in their daily lives? To what extent does bureaucratic decision-making shape religious affiliation data? Some non-mainstream religions are afforded the status of a religion, while others are not. Within the ASCRG, it is interesting to note that although the ABS has included a Spiritualist category for example, in both the 1991 and 1996 classificatory systems, a New Age category is absent in the ASCRG for both 1991 and 1996 (ABS, 1996), whereas in the United States, the New Age is documented as the self-described religion of 20,000 Americans during 1990 and 68,000 Americans during 2001 (United States Bureau of the Census, 2003). One must presume that the New Age is not conceived to be a “religion” by ABS policy makers and that people self- identifying as New Age are simply assigned to one of the “inadequately described” categories2. Given that the New Age has no distinct and identifiable organisational structure and is more about the provision of multiple worldviews by numerous entrepreneurs than a unitary set of beliefs or practices, it would seem reasonable that the New Age is not listed as a religious category in the ASCRG. Nevertheless, this means that the number of people who might self- identify as New Age within Australia is unable to be determined under existing ABS policy. An intriguing development at the time of the Census conducted in 2001 also indicates that idiosyncratic responses to census religious affiliation questions are lost from public view due to bureaucratic decision making about what does and does not constitute a “religion”. A proportion of populations within Australia, Canada and the United Kingdom appear to have attempted to exert pressure on their respective governments to create a new religious affiliation category during 2001. Large numbers of respondents were reported in the public media as having identified their religion as Jedi, Jedi Knight, or some other Jedi related term in the censuses that took place in Australia, Canada and the United Kingdom that year. An estimated total of 70,509 Australians (0.37%)3, 390,000 people in the United Kingdom (0.7% of the total population, and over 2% in numerous districts) (Office for National Statistics, 2003a), and around 20,000 Canadians4 identified their religious affiliation as Jedi in their respective census surveys in 2001. This begs the question of why large numbers of people from these three countries would have responded to the religion item with a term linked to a belief in “the force”, an energy field giving Jedi Knights their power as depicted in the Star 2 The Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS, 1996) identifies the criteria on which they base these decisions. 3 Reported by BBC News, 27 August 2002 (British Broadcasting Corporation, 2002). 4 Reported by Radio-Canada.ca (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, 2003) and Canadian Press (2003) on 13 May 2003. 17 Wars films. This phenomenon is said to have followed worldwide circulation of an email urging individuals to identify their religion as Jedi so as to facilitate its recognition as an official religion (Office for National Statistics, 2003a). While these occurrences have been claimed to exemplify an iconoclastic act, an act of dissent towards government, and/or a practical joke on the part of those declaring themselves as Jedi affiliates (Farlex Inc, 2004), it would seem that Jedi might constitute a form of religious belief for at least some proportion of this group. Indeed, the mass suicide performed by 39 members of the Heaven’s Gate cult in 1997 (Introvigne, 2002), the teachings of Ron L. Hubbard and his Church of Scientology, which has attracted a worldwide membership (Bainbridge, 2004c), and the widespread popularity of astrology all demonstrate the seriousness that some proportion of the population attach to the notion that galactic phenomena and human experience and destiny are linked – from which they derive some sense of direction and/or meaning. Contrary to the apparent objectives of those who responded with a Jedi-related term to the religious affiliation items on the 2001 censuses in the UK, Australia and Canada (according to the public media), Jedi has not gained status as an official religion in either Australia or Canada. In Australia, Jedi responses were assigned to the “not defined” category and the ABS issued a special release explaining their position on the Jedi issue, disclaiming that they had “threatened anyone” with penalties for responding to the 2001 Census with a Jedi-related response, though identifying clearly that under the Census and Statistics Act penalties of up to $1000 apply for “knowingly supplying false or misleading information” (ABS, 2001b). In Britain, however, Jedi responses have been included under the “other religions” category, with statistics on Jedi affiliation within the United Kingdom being readily available to the public (Office for National Statistics, 2003a). In the United Kingdom, census data gives no indication of changes in religious affiliation over time. In fact, the 2001 Census was the first census which included a religious affiliation item (Office for National Statistics, 2004). Census forms provided a limited range of religious faiths, namely Christian, Buddhist, Hindu, Jewish, Muslim, and Sikh, with free space being provided for a written response for those affiliated with some other religion (Office for National Statistics, 2004). In 2001, 76.8 per cent of the population in the UK reported some religious affiliation (71.6% Christian), while 15.5% stated that they had no religion. Some 7.3% of the population failed to respond to the religion item (Office for National Statistics, 2003b). In the United States, levels of self-described religious affiliation appear to be higher than they are in either the United Kingdom or Australia. However, it is worth noting that the United States government is prevented by the American constitution from including religion items in census surveys. Thus the gathering on religion-related data rests on that obtained 18 from surveys, Gallup polls, and records kept by religious organisations - data that are not directly comparable to data derived from nationwide censuses. According to findings from the American Religious Identification Survey (ARIS) 2001, there was a substantial decline in the proportion of the American population identifying with Christianity between 1990 and 2001, and a substantial increase in those not identifying with any religion. Specifically, there was a ten per cent decline in those affiliated with Christianity between 1990 (86.3%) and 2001 (76.7%), a slight increase in those affiliated with non-Christian religions (3.3% in 1999; 3.7% in 2001), and a six per cent increase in those unaffiliated with any religion (8.2% in 1999; 14.2% in 2001) (United States Bureau of the Census, 2003). Despite observed declines in religious affiliation in Australia and the United States, it remains that the majority of these populations, as well as those living in the United Kingdom, appear to maintain some religious affiliation. However, when church attendance is considered, one is left to conclude that religion is an increasingly private affair; individual religiosity is increasingly independent of any tangible involvement with religious organisations or institutions. Church attendance The United States is often identified as standing apart from the rest of the developed world because it alone is claimed to have maintained high levels of church attendance. Results from the Gallup Organisation survey of Americans in 2002 indicated that 42 per cent of Americans attended church or synagogue each week (Princeton Religion Research Center, 2002). However, these figures have been disputed by Hadaway and Marler (2005), who considered estimates of total religious organisations throughout the United States, known population values for church attendance, and sample-based attendance counts. Using this approach, Hadaway and Marler estimate that weekly church attendance in the United States is likely to be as low as 22 per cent. A Gallup poll conducted in late 1999 showed that 30 per cent of Americans described themselves as ‘spiritual’ but not interested in attending church, and that 54 per cent described themselves as being religious; yet 45 per cent of this latter group also reported they were “more likely to follow their own instincts than denominational teachings”5. Thus church attendance measures are likely to be a poor indicator of the extent that churchgoers adhere to religious doctrine, beliefs and practices. 5 USA Today-CNN-Gallup poll for December 1999, as reported in Religion Today on 29 December 1999 (Cable News Network, 1999). 19 Recent findings from a study conducted by Arnett and Jensen (2002) provide insight into the nature of contemporary religiosity among young American adults living in the Midwest (N=144). Self-report questionnaire and interview data obtained from 21 to 28 year olds indicate that despite 64 per cent of the sample reporting that they had been brought up to believe in a particular set of religious beliefs, their current belief systems were distributed fairly evenly across four distinct categories (24 % Agnostic/atheist; 29% Deist, including spirituality, a non-religious belief in God, and individualised beliefs drawn from witchcraft, Eastern religions, and popular culture; 26% Liberal Christian; 22% Conservative Christian). Arnett and Jensen (2002:464) highlight that many of their study’s respondents appeared to conceive participation in religious institutions as an “intolerable compromise of their individuality” and conclude from their findings that overall, these young adults appear to prefer to operate as a “congregation of one”. In Australia too, one could interpret religious affiliation data as indicating that Australian society remains largely ‘religious’. However, church attendance figures highlight that in terms of religious practice, less than one quarter of the Australian adult population go to church or participate in religious activities. In 2002, only 23 per cent of those surveyed had participated in church or religious activities in the three-month period prior to interview6 (ABS, 2004b). Estimates based on data gathered by the National Church Life Survey, 2001 indicate that weekly church attendance among Australians is as low as 8.8 per cent (Bellamy & Castle, 2004). The overall decline in church attendance in Australia is largely due to reductions in attendance at church services held by mainstream Christian denominations. Increased church attendances have been observed for denominations associated with the Charismatic movement7 however. Findings from the National Church Life Survey, 2001 indicate that within 6 Although church attendance tends to increase with age among the Australian population, the lowest rate of church attendance was found among 25 to 34 year olds (19.4%) and the highest rate among 65 to 74 year olds (27.1%) according to the General Social Survey, 2002. Church attendance among 18 to 24 year olds was estimated to be 19.7%, though this statistic is based on the total population within Australia. Differences in church attendance between individual States within Australia were not reported. 7 The term “charismatic” is somewhat problematic (Robbins, 2004), but is often taken to refer to a range of Christian religions that regard miracles, prophecy, healing, and speaking in tongues as manifestations of the Holy Spirit. Pentecostal churches promote speaking in tongues (or glossolalia) as 20 Australia between 1991 and 2001 church attendance decreased by 7 per cent among Anglicans, by 18 per cent among Lutherans, by 1 per cent among Presbyterians, and by 15 per cent and 22 per cent among those attending Reformed and Uniting church services, respectively (Bellamy & Castle, 2004). During this same period, large increases in church attendance were observed for the following churches: Apostolic (32%); Assemblies of God (30%); Christian and Missionary Alliance (46%); Church Revival Crusade (12%); and Church of the Nazarene (33%) (Bellamy & Castle, 2004). Although these increases represent fairly modest numbers of conversions when considering the small proportion of church attendance attributed to Charismatic churches since the 1960s, it remains that having accounted for only a small fraction of overall church attendance in the 1960s, by 1996 the Charismatic churches accounted for over 10 per cent of all church attendance, suggestive of a substantial increase in the popularity of the Charismatic movement (Bellamy & Castle, 2004). Evidence of the increased popularity of the Charismatic movement is not restricted to church attendance data however. The religious practices employed among those affiliated with Pentecostal churches such as speaking in tongues, as well as the Toronto blessing, appear to have gained favour among a proportion of traditional Christian groups unaffiliated with Pentecostal and other charismatic denominations. According to figures that take into account church attendees across all denominations in 1996, “speaking in tongues” was endorsed by 27 per cent of attendees, with 14 per cent reporting that they had experienced this phenomenon themselves (National Church Life Survey [NCLS], 2004 ). Ten per cent of those reporting that they speak in tongues were not affiliated with Pentecostal churches but with Catholic, Anglican, Uniting and other large non-Pentecostal denominations. Furthermore, 10 per cent of a sample of Anglican and Protestant church attendees reported having experienced the Toronto Blessing. Another 21 per cent of this Anglican and Protestant group agreed that they approved of this phenomenon, 43 per cent were neutral and 36 per cent disapproved (NCLS, 2004). The Toronto blessing, otherwise known as the “laughing revival”, is a ‘spiritual experience’ that emerged in 1994 and spread throughout the world from its host church in Toronto, Canada. By 1998, the host church had attracted over one million visitors (Poloma & Hoelter, 1998). It is claimed that this “revival” has penetrated numerous denominations and that around seven thousand churches in the United Kingdom have reported experiencing something similar to this “Holy laughter” phenomenon (Gilley, 1999). part of Church doctrine, while other churches associated with the Charismatic movement may forbid or discourage this particular practice. 21 While in the past, researchers studying the religion-mental health relationship have generally employed methodologies using measures like church attendance and religious affiliation, assuming that these represent some particularised set of beliefs and practices, this assumption fails to reflect reality in today’s world. Apart from the issue that individuals are now engaging in religious activities run by churches that they are not formally affiliated with, “switching” from one religion to another is also commonplace (see Warner, 1993). The number of changes in religious affiliation that might take place for a given individual over time raises doubts about the accuracy of interpretations made from religious affiliation data that are based on an assumption of a single change in religious affiliation between two time points such as religion of upbringing and religion at a specific stage in adulthood. The one aspect of religious change that has largely been ignored within the study of religion is the shift away from a traditional belief in God to an alternative conception of the divine. Traditional and non-traditional religious and spiritual beliefs Traditional and alternative conceptions of the divine Belief in God appears to have been replaced by alternative conceptions of the divine by substantial proportions of different populations. These beliefs clearly deviate from traditional religious thought, since they regard ultimate reality as involving a “spiritual” or “higher” power; some sort of depersonalised “energy” or “force”. Yet there is a tendency for these two contrasting conceptions of the divine to be treated as if they both represent “belief in God”. Australian data obtained from the Australian Community Survey, 1998 (ACS) from a large national sample (N = 8,500) indicates that 74 per cent of respondents endorsed either a belief in God, or a spiritual or higher power, or life force. Thirty-nine per cent agreed that they believed in a spiritual or higher power or life force – notably higher than the 35 per cent who described themselves as believing in a personal God. Yet the NCLS reported that the majority of Australians continue to “believe in God” (NCLS, 2004). These figures are similar to those found for the United Kingdom from survey and Gallup poll data gathered in the early to mid- 1990s. At this stage, forty per cent of the British population were estimated to believe in “God as a spirit or life force”, while 31 per cent were estimated to believe in a “personal God” (Gill, Hadaway, & Marler, 1998). In the recent Baylor Religion Survey, 2005, a nationally representative sample of Americans (N=1,721), respondents were given a range of options for R/S beliefs including belief in God, and belief in a higher power or cosmic force. The same approach to that taken by the NCLS was used in summarising the results from this comprehensive report on American religious belief and practice in relation to the 10.8 per cent of Americans with no 22 religious affiliation. These two beliefs were referred to in singular terms – “the majority of Americans not affiliated with a religious tradition (62.9%) believe in God or some higher power” (Bader, Dougherty, Froese, Johnson, & Menckson, 2006:12). A figure included with this text however, revealed that 44.5 per cent of religiously unaffiliated Americans in 2005 believed in a higher power, while 11.6 per cent had no doubts that God exists, 4.8 per cent believed in God but “with some doubts”, and 2.1 per cent believed in God “sometimes”. The treatment of belief in God and belief in a higher power as a singular R/S belief in the reporting of these Australian and American findings, contrasts with the way similar data were reported and interpreted in the Netherlands. Using a representative sample (N=1,848) aged 16 years and over, living in the Netherlands in 1998, it was found that 33 per cent of respondents agreed that “there has to be something like a higher force that controls life”, compared to 27 per cent who held a more traditional belief, namely that “there is a God who personally occupies himself with every human being”. Another 27 per cent were unsure whether “there is a God or a higher force” and 12 per cent were in agreement that “there is no God or higher force” (Houtman & Mascini 2002:462). Unlike the reporting of Australian and American data, these results showing a higher proportion of respondents believing in a higher force compared to those believing in God were interpreted to indicate a shift away from Christianity towards New Age philosophy among the Dutch population (see Houtman & Mascini, 2002). Two other studies have also treated traditional and non-traditional conceptions of the divine as distinct entities. Rice (2003) found that in 1998, the vast majority of a national sample of Americans (N=1,255) maintained a belief in God (80.6%), while 14.5 per cent endorsed belief in a spirit or life force. Similarly, Kelly and De Graff (1997) reported prevalence rates of traditional and non-traditional R/S beliefs across 15 nations8 using data from the 1991 religion module of the International Social Survey Program (N=19,528). Considering all of these 15 nations, 15 per cent were found to believe in a higher power of some kind but not a personal God, compared to 34 per cent who agreed that they “know God really exists”. Another 20 per cent agreed that “While I have doubts, I feel that I do believe in God”, 12 per cent rejected belief in God, 10 per cent were unsure if they believed in God, and didn’t believe there is any way to find out, and 9 per cent stated that they believe in God some of the time, but not at other times (Kelley & De Graff, 1997:643). Since this data is now more 8 Including Australia, Austria, East Germany, Great Britain, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, New Zealand, Northern Ireland, Norway, Poland, Slovenia, United States, and West Germany. 23 than 15 years old, the extent that cross-national prevalence rates of traditional and non- traditional conceptions of the divine might have changed during the past decade and a half is unknown. While disparate interpretations of similar data raise conceptual issues, data from the United States also raise issues related to the measurement of people’s conception of the divine. The Religion and Public Life Survey, 2001, a national survey of a random sample of Americans (N=2041), asked respondents “If you had to describe God in your own words, what would you say?” (Association of Religion Data Archives, 2001). Respondents could give multiple responses and were prompted by interviewers to give more than one answer. Responses were coded into one-word and group answers. Of the grouped answers (involving at least three descriptors of God; n=1087), the preferred description of God as being a “Higher Power/Supreme Being/ Power” ranked fourth (7.1%), after “Almighty/All- Powerful/ omnipotent” (9.1%), “Creator/Maker/Architect of the universe” (8.3%), and “Love/All-loving/Unconditional Love” (8.2%). More traditional conceptions of God were endorsed by comparatively fewer respondents: “I believe/God is real/He exists” (4.0%, ranking 7th); “Saviour/Redeemer” (2.2%; ranking 11th); and “Father, Son and Holy Spirit/ The Trinity” (0.3%; equally ranked 34th with “She/A Woman/A Black Woman”). Only 2.6 per cent reported that they were unsure if there is a God (or “don’t know/no idea”), and just 0.9 per cent reported that they did not believe in God at all (or “don’t care/nothing”) (Association of Religion Data Archives, 2001)9. While this data supports the claim that the vast majority of Americans “believe in God”, it also highlights the diverse ways in which Americans conceive “God”. In using terminology that includes “God” in lead-in questions, these kinds of surveys are likely to produce results that are to some degree at least, artefacts of the measures used. A recent article published by Michael King and colleagues (2005) highlights the problems associated with attempts to tap the strength of spiritual beliefs that exist outside of traditional religious contexts. In devising the Beliefs and Values Scale, King et al. (2005:6) found that “participants expressed difficulty in answering statements in the Intrinsic 9 The data were downloaded from the Association of Religion Data Archives, www.TheARDA.com, and were collected by the Pew Research Center for the People and the Press. The variable “descgod1” was analysed to obtain the frequencies reported here (n=1087; missing = 234). Additional variables provided in this dataset (descgod2 – n=552; descgod3 – n=189; descgod4 – n=68; and descgod5 – n=19) represent additional descriptors of God that were provided by respondents over and above those included in the descgod1 variable, and which were also coded into group answers. 24 Religious Motivation Scale mainly because it too often assumed a religious belief”. Thus, findings from surveys will largely depend on the range of options given to respondents, and reflect the wording used in survey items. The evidence cited above suggests that non-traditional conceptions of the divine are held by substantial proportions of various populations. Earlier discussion demonstrates that single measures of religious affiliation and church attendance provide no insight into the extent that non-traditional R/S beliefs are embraced by churchgoers and those who report being affiliated with a particular religion. The rise in popularity of New Age beliefs and practices provides yet another example of a trend that undermines any notion that attendance at services provided by a particular religious organisation, or religious affiliation, reflect homogeneity in belief or practice. The New Age movement requires specific attention since its influence appears to be so widespread. New Age beliefs and practices Widespread acceptance of New Age beliefs and practices, as well as those associated with the Human Potential movement (which arguably represent the same movement) are likely to have influenced the beliefs and practices of those affiliated, along with those who are not affiliated, with mainstream religious denominations. Large numbers of people are known to endorse New Age beliefs (Burrows, 1986; Chandler, 1988; D'Antonio, 1992; Houtman & Mascini, 2002; Wilson, 1988) and to be consumers of products and materials linked with the New Age and Human Potential movements (Aldred, 2002). Associated products such as self- help books, courses, and a vast range of therapies have flooded mainstream markets providing “how to” approaches for the securing of improvements in life domains as diverse as wealth, relationships, career, and happiness, as well as promised cures for chronic and terminal illness, and ways to gain spiritual enlightenment. James Redfield’s (1993) book, Celestine Prophecy, which incorporates various facets of New Age philosophy, was an international best-seller for several years during the 1990s. Indeed, Kaufman (1997:v) notes that with the increasing popularity of New Age/How-to books, the New York Times Book Review “was obliged to create a splinter category” for the genre of “Advice, How-to, and Miscellaneous” books to prevent traditional non-fiction books from “being altogether bumped from its best-seller list”. Kaufman (1997:v) suggests that the popularity of these books is a direct consequence of a spiritual malaise among the American middle class: 25 The titles in this booming “self-help” genre are often mere come-ons for the more costly emotional liniments peddled by the sages of the midnight infomercial: audiotapes, videotapes, seminars, retreats. Its spiritual void seemingly untouched by traditional religion and the blandishments of prosperity, the American middle class wanders the carnival tent of New Age healers and prophets, hell-bent on buying the happiness that money can’t buy. Besecke (2005:179) too, notes that Barnes’ and Noble’s 2003 best-sellers list included eight books written by “authors of contemporary wisdom”, that people throughout the world pick up books in stores labelled “Spiritual Matters”, and that interested readers gather together to discuss the ideas contained in these publications. Apart from the widespread purchase of New Age books and materials, Aldred (2002:65) highlights that “New Age philosophies and methods are gaining inroads into the mainstream corporate world” and that there are an increasing number of “New Money” counsellors employed by successful business people. The infiltration of these New Age philosophies and methods into mainstream America was evident as far back as the 1980s, with management and staff training programs that promote these philosophies and methods being used by large American corporations, the US Army and NASA (Aldred, 2002:66-67). In 1986, the syllabus at Stanford University included a seminar entitled “Creativity in Business” within their business school, focussing on meditation, chanting, dream work, the use of tarot cards, and the “New Age capitalist” (see Aldred, 2002:66; Rupert, 1992:127). Moreover, the academic organisational management literature now identifies the “organisational spirituality movement” as providing a new theoretical model for organisational management, involving practices, beliefs, values, and norms that promote: a shared vision; individual and group transparency; equity and justice; personal consciousness and accountability; ethical clarity and soundness; task significance; individual, organisational, and societal connectedness; inclusiveness; servanthood; empowerment and shared governance; and active individual and organisational spiritual practice and expression (see Quatro, 2004:232). Quatro (2004) traces the development of this “spiritual” approach to organisational management within the academy to the works of Mary Parker Follett (1918), Greenleaf (1970; 1988) and Maslow (1998), because of their attention to the “depth and meaning of human potential in organizational settings” (Quatro, 2004:229). However, it would seem impossible to gauge the extent of influence that New Age/Human Potential entrepreneurs might have had on individuals within the academy who currently promote the spirituality model for organisational management. Nor is it possible to gauge the extent that New Age/Human Potential ideology has infiltrated the consciousness of the general population, through the activities of New Age and Human Potential entrepreneurs within the public domain via workshops and seminars, 26 and the private domain through consumption of written, audio and visual materials. It is also unclear whether those who have attended workshops and/or seminars or purchased New Age materials even perceive themselves as having been involved in activities associated with the New Age and/or Human Potential movements. Even though the influence of the New Age movement is observed to be widespread among populations, its lack of formal structure and eclectic beliefs and practices, largely preclude its recognition as an identifiable and discrete group. This creates substantial obstacles to the study of New Age beliefs and practices as objects of study in their own right, thus undermining the making of determinations of their true prevalence within populations. The embracing of all religions within New Age philosophy – “all religions are the expression of the same inner reality” (Heelas, 1993) – makes it possible for religious adherents to incorporate New Age beliefs and practices into their lives while maintaining ties with mainstream religious institutions and settings. One study of Texan residents in 1998 showed that despite 91.3 per cent of the sample (N=911) describing themselves as being affiliated with mainstream Christian denominations and 90 per cent as being churchgoers, 22 per cent of the overall sample had purchased New Age materials (in the form of books, magazines, audio or videotapes) in the past year. Only two variables, support for New Age beliefs and having friends or relatives who have purchased New Age materials, were found to be significantly associated with the purchase of New Age materials, despite the inclusion of income, education, employment, religious affiliation, and religious participation/church attendance variables into a multiple regression model (Mears & Ellison, 2000). These findings suggest that consumption of New Age materials might now be common across the social spectrum. Almost one third (30.9%) of respondents also reported believing in reincarnation and 28.3 per cent reported believing that the dead could be communicated with (Mears & Ellison, 2000). In Australia too, it would seem that beliefs and practices that are characteristic of New Age thought were becoming commonplace towards the end of the 1990s. Data from the ACS in 1998 indicates that among a national sample of Australians, 27 per cent reported that they believed in reincarnation, 18 per cent agreed that they often or occasionally sought direction from a horoscope, 9 per cent reported that they practiced Eastern meditation, and 7 per cent had used psychic or crystal healing. Two-thirds of the sample also agreed that a spiritual life was important to them (NCLS, 2004). Roof (1993) too, found that many of the 1,599 American “baby boomers” he studied participated in New Age activities, had “defected from religious participation”, and had rejected more traditional forms of worship for a personal 27 faith characterised by a “spiritual journey” or “spiritual quest”. Other research conducted by Donahue (1998) examined the prevalence of New Age beliefs among 561 congregations from six denominations across eight regions of the United States. In-depth surveys were administered, with respondents being asked whether they agreed with a number of statements that were conceived to represent New Age beliefs (belief that human nature is basically good; belief in reincarnation; astrology; communication with the dead; belief that meditation and self-discipline will lead to the knowledge that all spiritual truth and wisdom lies within; belief that one is in charge of one’s own life and a person can be anything they want to be; and that individuals should arrive at their own beliefs, independent of any church), and a range of statements related to religious faith. Conservative Southern Baptist Convention members ranked lowest on each of the seven New Age statements, while members of the liberal United Church of Christ ranked highest on four of these statements. However, no significant differences were evident between any of the denominations in relation to the view that one should arrive at one’s own beliefs. Respondents’ age was negatively associated with two beliefs, belief that one could be anything and belief that one could communicate with the dead. The more strongly church members endorsed the item “Salvation refers to the attainment of justice and peace throughout the world”, the more likely they were to endorse reincarnation, astrology and the belief that spiritual truth lies within (Donahue, 1998). Education was observed to be negatively associated with both astrology and the belief that spiritual truth lies within, with the latter also being found to be negatively correlated with a theistic view of God. Overall, this study showed that there seemed to be no cohesive set of beliefs that represented “New Age beliefs”. Beliefs pertaining to the supernatural (reincarnation, astrology, and communication with the dead) were only endorsed by around 10 per cent of this particular sample. However, most notable was that around one third of this churchgoing sample believed that all spiritual truth and wisdom lies within the individual, with the same proportion asserting that the individual should arrive at their own beliefs, independent of the church. While Donahue’s (1998) study shows that only a minority of this Christian sample believed in communication with the dead (ranging from 3 to 10 per cent across eight regions), more recent data from the Baylor Religion Survey, 2005 indicates that around 19.9 per cent of the American population believe “it is possible to communicate with the dead” (Bader, Dougherty, Froese et al., 2006). At first glance, this finding seems inconsistent with other population data gathered from the General Social Surveys (GSS) from 1984, 1988 and 1989, which indicated that during these years 42.3, 39.9, and 35.6 per cent of the US population 28 respectively, reported having had contact with someone who had died on at least one occasion in their lives (Laubach, 2004). While this GSS data was collected six to 10 years earlier than that gathered by the Baylor survey and this might explain the inconsistency of their findings, it is hard to imagine that there was an approximate 16 to 22 per cent decrease in belief in communication with the dead among the American population between the 1980s and 2005. These discrepant results are likely to have emerged because the Baylor survey item tapped belief in the possibility of contact with the dead at one time point, while the GSS item tapped personal experience of that same phenomenon over the whole of the life course. A proportion of people who have experienced contact with the dead at some time during their lives may well decide that this form of communication is “impossible” and attribute this experience to a grief-response or momentary delusion or hallucination, instead of viewing it as “evidence” that communication with the dead is possible. From the discussion above, it becomes clear that there is considerable overlap between New Age beliefs and paranormal beliefs. Some research has investigated a range of beliefs that fall into each of these categories and these studies are outlined below. Paranormal experiences and beliefs, and New Age beliefs The majority of the American population appear to believe that they have had some sort of paranormal experience related to extra-sensory perception, contact with spirits, visions, clairvoyance, or mystical experiences. Only 13.5 per cent of the GSS samples from 1984, 1988 and 1989 (N=3,892) reported “never” having had one of these experiences (27.9 per cent reported having had such occurrences “once or twice”, 40.1 per cent “several times”, and 18.1 per cent “often”) (Laubach, 2004). A range of different religious and paranormal beliefs were studied by Rice (2003) using data derived from the 1998 Southern Focus Poll conducted by the Institute for Research in Social Science at the University of North Carolina. Among this national sample of 1,255, the majority reported that they believe that people on Earth are sometimes possessed by the Devil (58.6%) and in ESP (60.1%), psychic or spiritual healing (58.6%), and déjà vu (69.2%). Furthermore, 40.6 per cent agreed that UFOs were something real rather than a figment of people’s imaginations, 27.1 per cent agreed that they personally had used the power of their own mind to heal their own body, and 42.1 per cent said they believed in ghosts. The vast majority of this sample endorsed a belief in God (80.6%) and 14.5 per cent endorsed belief in a spirit or life force. Younger people were found to be more likely to believe in heaven and hell, extraterrestrials, ghosts, and déjà vu, than older people. However, older people were 29 observed to be more likely to belief in ESP and to have either used prayer to cure an illness or their mind to heal their body. Better-educated people were significantly more likely to believe in three particular beliefs including ESP, psychic healing and déjà vu. When distinguishing classic paranormal beliefs (astrology, ESP, extraterrestrials, ghosts, psychic and spiritual healing, reincarnation and déjà vu) from religious paranormal beliefs (heaven and hell, Devil possession, God answers prayers), gender was shown to affect belief patterns. Females were much more likely to hold classic paranormal beliefs, with the exception of belief in extraterrestrials, which males were much more likely to endorse. In general, social background factors such as race, education, income and residence were found to be poor predictors of paranormal beliefs in this study (Rice, 2003). The recent study by Bader and colleagues (2006) also found little connection between education and paranormal beliefs and experiences, and that males tended to report having sighted a UFO more than females. However, this study did find that particular paranormal beliefs differed according to income and place of residence. Those with higher incomes were observed to be less likely than those with low incomes to have had prophetic dreams, to believe they had visited haunted houses, to have attempted to contact the dead (via a Ouija board) or to have sighted UFOs. Paranormal beliefs also differed significantly between groups according to whether respondents lived within the East, West, Midwest or South of the United States (Bader, Dougherty, Froese et al., 2006). Two main hypotheses have prevailed to date about the relationship between religious and paranormal beliefs. One hypothesis suggests that religious and classic paranormal beliefs will be negatively correlated because they represent competing belief systems (Emmons & Sobal, 1981). The other suggests that religious and classic paranormal beliefs will be positively correlated because both sets of beliefs suppose realities that lie outside the realm of scientific investigation or explanation (Wuthnow, 1978). Rice’s (2003) findings do not support either hypothesis, suggestive that patterns of belief are extremely diverse and cannot be explained by theories that promote the notion that differing belief systems arise according to a religious/paranormal dichotomy, or that both religious and paranormal beliefs are related because each of their respective foundations reflect a disregard for scientific ‘fact’. Bainbridge‘s (2004b) research supports the view that there is no simple relationship between religion and paranormal beliefs. He used data gathered from a survey administered on-line via the World Wide Web, entitled Survey2001, to test similar hypotheses to those tested by Rice (2003), except that Bainbridge (2004b) sought to determine connections and disconnections between religion and the New Age. The study sample was restricted to English speaking participants who answered all 30 items (N = 3,909), measuring agreement and non- 30 agreement with statements about technology, and 20 items related to “pseudoscience, para- religion, or what might be called New Age ideology” (including believing in the ancient civilisation Atlantis, in extra-terrestrials, in communication with the dead, that certain instruments can measure the human spirit, and so on). (Bainbridge, 2004b:383). Factor analysis revealed three main factors, including a General New Age factor, an Anti-Paranormal factor, and an Anti-Aliens factor. A complex relationship was found to emerge between conventional religiousness and New Age items. Although there was a strong correlation between frequency of church attendance and prayer/meditation (r = 0.59), of the 1,011 respondents who never attend church, only 590 were found to never pray, with 42 per cent of the unchurched group praying or meditating at least occasionally. Involvement with organised religion was found to be associated with opposition to New Age beliefs, but personal religiosity (as indicated by prayer or meditation) was found to be related to endorsement of New Age beliefs. Bainbridge (2004b:393) argues that two competing cultures exist, one being religious and the other not, leaving those people caught between these two cultures with a receptivity to a range of beliefs that have a “deviant” religious character. He concludes that there is a cultural continuity between religion and the New Age, such that “standard churches may inadvertently and inescapably encourage the emergence of competitors who fall outside their own traditions” (Bainbridge, 2004b:393). The idea that Churches have played a key role in the uptake of New Age beliefs for those whose religious and/or spiritual needs are unmet by involvement with traditional religious organisations is further evidenced by patterns of change in religious affiliation among younger generations. Intergenerational change in religiosity It would appear that young people are especially prone to reject religious doctrine and authority (Arnett & Jensen, 2002), to be attracted to NRMs (Kepel, 1991), and to report much higher levels of psychic beliefs and experiences than older age groups (Bader, Dougherty, Froese et al., 2006). Arnett’s and Jensen’s (2002) study showed that 29 per cent of a young American sample have adopted individualised beliefs that borrow from witchcraft, Eastern religious traditions, and popular culture, or embrace a non-religious belief in God or “spirituality”, despite the fact that the majority had been raised in a traditional religion. Gunnoe and Moore (2002) too, found that 32 per cent of a college-aged sample had changed their religious affiliation from the religion in which they were raised. Young people’s religious/spiritual beliefs are clearly shaped by multiple influences 31 including family, friends, the process of maturation, teachers, school curricula, the mass media, popular culture, and a nation’s culture (Kelley & De Graff, 1997). The extent though, that broad social processes and influences affect young adult religiosity remains unclear. Work by Kelly and De Graaf (1997) however, suggests that national culture has a strong effect on the religious beliefs held by populations. They compared the relative influences of national context and parental socialisation on religious belief across 15 nations, controlling for a nation’s level of economic development, exposure to Communism, and an individual’s religious affiliation, age, gender and education. They found that within religious nations, national context has a greater influence on children’s religious/spiritual beliefs than does family religiosity and that people from religious nations acquire more orthodox beliefs than among similar people living in secular countries. By contrast, they observed that in relatively secular nations, family religiosity strongly shapes children’s religious beliefs, while national religious context has little influence (Kelley & De Graff, 1997). Nevertheless, family religiosity and other religious influences in the developing years have been shown to be strong predictors of offspring religiosity during adolescence and in young adulthood when assessed at an individual level. Gunnoe and Moore (2002) for example, found religious schooling during childhood, having friends who attended church in adolescence, and having a mother who attended church and believed religion to be important, to strongly predict a traditional religious orientation in young adulthood (based on a summary measure of church attendance, belief in the importance of religion, and frequency of prayer). Individual intelligence and achievement (cognitive ability and class rank in adolescence), as well as family characteristics (maternal parenting style, family size, and parental divorce) were found to be unrelated to this same outcome (Gunnoe & Moore, 2002). Maternal and paternal religiosity have also been observed to influence male offspring religiosity in early adolescence in different ways, with fathers being found to have a greater influence than mothers on their sons’ church attendance, and mothers to have a greater influence than fathers on their sons’ application of religion to their lives (Clark, Worthington, & Danser, 1988). Apart from the influences of national culture, the mass media, schools, friends, family and so on, one can only speculate about the extent that increased access to the internet is now influencing religious and spiritual beliefs in contemporary society. The internet and religion and spirituality The internet provides unprecedented opportunities for the marketing and exploration of 32 countless religious/spiritual worldviews, with younger generations having access to this medium from the time of childhood onwards. The broad range of worldviews that are being promoted via the World Wide Web is highlighted by recent research conducted by Bainbridge (2004c), using data on religion obtained from the recent internet survey, Survey2000, supported by the National Geographic Society. The survey yielded 46,000 adult responses in sentence or paragraph format to the question: “Imagine the future and try to predict how the world will change over the next century. Think about everyday life as well as major changes in society, culture, and technology” (Bainbridge, 2004a:1010). Of the 2,000 distinct ideas about the future identified through content analysis, 100 concerned religion (Bainbridge, 2004a:1010). Responses were categorised into three main themes – religion without science, religion with science, and science without religion. These were subdivided further into multiple scenarios within each of the three main categories. Scenarios imagined by respondents within the religion without science category, included the belief that there will be a revival of conventional faith, a proliferation of NRMs, the growing of a stronger New Age movement, an increase in fanaticism and religious conflict, direct divine intervention (return of Jesus Christ, Armageddon, government by divine intervention, and direct intervention by God and angels). Responses falling within the religion with science category suggested the likelihood that religion and science will work together and religion will become more science-orientated than biblical, with new science-oriented religions emerging from which people will seek “mastery over their own minds, tapping into greater consciousness” (Bainbridge, 2004a:1015). In discussing this domain, Bainbridge (2004a:1015-1017) gives particular attention to the success of Scientology, founded by Ron L. Hubbard, in appearing to bridge the gulf between science and religion by promoting the notion that an individual can “clear” themselves (the attainment of high status through use of a technological confessional device known as the “e-meter”): and speculates that it may be this kind of “science-oriented” religion that will emerge in the future. Bainbridge (2004a:1016) highlights the attraction of Scientology for Americans in particular, noting that of the 15,693 personal websites launched by Scientologists in 11 different languages for members in 45 nations, 55.8 per cent were residents of the United States. Interestingly, Australia ranked fourth among the nations with the highest number of these websites (772), after the United States, Italy (ranking second, with 1154), and the United Kingdom (ranking third, with 1144) (2004a:1016). The science without religion category includes projections into the future which envisage the following changes: science will “discover conclusively that the order to the universe is not 33 God”; the Christian Church will become “increasingly irrelevant”; Christian beliefs “will no longer prevail”; Judeo and Christian influences will “fade from the political agenda”; “younger people who have grown up in every major religion will question their beliefs and abandon their basic systems”; the world will be “less dependent on God and more dependent on self, as technology has given humans a god-like image”; and that “eventually, religion will be viewed as a harmful nuisance and will be outlawed from society” (Bainbridge, 2004a:1018). Together these visions of the future exemplify the complex nature of the contemporary religious milieu. They also highlight the disparate values reflected in respondents’ imagined futures for religion, with the polarisation of views about whether religion is “good” or “bad”, the prominence of ways of thinking that are promoted by the New Age and Human Potential movements, the ongoing tension between religion and science, and religious tolerance and intolerance being clearly evident. Even though the Survey2000 data represent imagined futures by a biased sample and thus provide little insight into the actual future of religion, they serve to highlight that the internet provides a new avenue for communication about religious/spiritual matters between people that is unconstrained by geographic location and reliance on face-to-face encounters. Thus, NRMs like Scientology, traditional religions, cults, sects, and individuals can promote their beliefs and activities to a countless number of potential adherents. While older generations have only had the capacity to engage in religious/spiritual communications of this sort from adulthood, younger generations have had the potential to participate in “on-line religion” throughout the course of their lives. Summary The range of data reported in this chapter clearly highlights that traditional methodologies, which make determinations about the influence of “religion” and “no religion”, according to single measures of church attendance, religious affiliation, or “belief in God”, or “belief in God or some sort of force or spirit”, ignore the complex nature of religion and spirituality as they exist in today’s societies. Discussion in this chapter has also highlighted that individuals are now free to choose what they do or do not believe, regardless of their affiliation or involvement with traditional religious organisations. Paranormal and New Age beliefs appear to be commonplace across the social spectrum. Consequently, traditional approaches to religion hold little potential for increasing our understanding of the relationship between contemporary religiosity and mental health and social behaviour. Pargament (2005:681) posits that religious constructs that are relevant to today’s religious landscape might better explain the religion-health connection than either “secular 34 psychological or social constructs”. Yet even though increased attention is being given to religion and spirituality as factors that have relevance for clinical practice (Blass, 2001; Larson & Larson, 2003), the scientific study of religion/spirituality currently lacks any clear theoretical and methodological approach that serves to further understanding of the nature of the religion/spirituality-mental health relationship. In particular, the possibility that traditional and non-traditional approaches to the divine might be differentially associated with mental health and social behaviour is currently receiving little theoretical attention, as will be demonstrated by the discussion provided towards the end of the following chapter. 35 Chapter Three: Theoretical perspectives on religion, spirituality, mental health and social behaviour This chapter outlines the theoretical underpinnings of the current study. Discussion focuses firstly, on the religion-spirituality nexus and highlights the need to differentiate “religious” from “non-religious” varieties of spirituality. Subsequently, Woodhead’s (1993) description of, and explanation for, the development of the New Spirituality are given lengthy attention. Woodhead’s (1993) work identifies the New Age movement as having a primary role in the shift away from religion-based spirituality to a non-religious variety of spirituality. Heelas’s (1993) description of the New Age movement is also discussed in detail as it complements Woodhead’s theory of the New Spirituality and provides insight into the nature of the New Age movement, its ideology, and associated activities. Sociological theories proposed by Emile Durkheim (1952 [1897]; 1968 [1915]), Thomas Luckmann (2003) and Georg Simmel (1997[1898-1918]), and current debates about secularisation theory are then outlined. In combination, the works of these respective authors provide a means of understanding the reasons behind the rise in popularity of the New Spirituality, the worldview it promotes, and why the mental health and social behaviour of those who endorse a non- traditional approach to the divine might differ from those who maintain a traditional belief in God. Since the psychology of religion has given extensive attention to the religion-mental health relationship, a brief overview of psychological and psychiatric theories is also provided in this chapter. These theories share some common ground with sociological theories in that socio-cultural contexts are considered to be one important dimension of religiosity. Since sociological and psychological perspectives on religion and spirituality are now intertwined with one another (Hill, Pargament, Hood Jr et al., 2000:53) and current debates about how religion and spirituality should be conceptualised and defined are predominantly taking place within the psychology of religion, psychological perspectives warrant due attention in this thesis. These debates identify the study of religion/spirituality as undergoing a theoretical ‘crisis’, as well as numerous issues that need to be borne in mind when considering the empirical evidence on religion, spirituality, mental health and social behaviour that is outlined in Chapter Four. The following discussion identifies the conceptual overlap between religion and spirituality, providing context to current debates about religion and spirituality and how the 36 New Spirituality fits into these debates. The religion-spirituality nexus The main issue that frustrates attempts to find operational definitions for religion and spirituality, which clearly separate one from the other, rests on the fact that there is considerable overlap between these terms. Even though “spirituality” appears to be seen as meaning the same thing as “religiousness” by some, others appear to view these terms as meaning something distinctly different (George, 2000:103). Indeed, among those who have written extensively about spirituality and religion, definitions for spirituality appear little different from those proposed for religion. Van Ness (1996:2) for example, suggests that being spiritual “is an attribute of the way one experiences the world and lives one’s life”. Simmel (1997[1898-1918]:5) defines religiousness in a similar fashion: What makes a person religious is the particular way in which he [sic] reacts to life in all its aspects, how he [sic] perceives a certain kind of unity in all the theoretical and practical details of life. Although Van Ness (1996:1) distinguishes secular and non-secular varieties of spirituality, by proposing that “secular spirituality is neither validated nor invalidated by religious varieties of spirituality. Its status is related to them but separable”, it remains unclear from Van Ness’s definition what it is that makes secular spirituality ‘separable’ from religious varieties of spirituality. Woodhead (1993:177) on the other hand, argues that spirituality is distinguishable from religion in that it is: …both the belief/awareness that there is some reality more real, more valuable, more important and more extensive that that revealed by science and to the practices by which people get in touch with this reality. I understand it as a more personal and individualistic notion than ‘religion’ which I use to refer to a system of more institutionally embedded beliefs and practices. The notion that religion is associated with institutionally embedded beliefs and practices, while spirituality is more to do with a belief in a spiritual realm that underlies tangible reality, appears to be the one point of consensus reached by numerous authors, leading to various definitions being proposed for religion and spirituality with this as the key differentiating factor. Yet this demarcation is only useful from a theoretical standpoint and does nothing to progress efforts aimed at distinguishing spirituality from religion for the purposes of creating separate operational definitions for each. The problem remains that those who attend church describe themselves as being “religious but not spiritual”, “religious and spiritual”, and “spiritual but 37 not religious” (Roof, 1993; Zinnbauer, Pargament, & Scott, 1999). It is the latter group in particular, that creates a conceptual quandary for researchers. Characteristics of those who describe themselves as being “spiritual but not religious” have been identified by Roof (1993). Roof’s (1993) study of a large sample of “baby boomers” indicates that those describing themselves this way are less likely to view religiousness in a positive light, to engage in traditional forms of worship like church attendance and prayer, and to hold orthodox or traditional religious beliefs, and to be more likely to be independent from others, to engage in group experiences related to spiritual growth, to hold non-traditional New Age beliefs, to have mystical experiences, and to differentiate religiousness and spirituality as discrete, non-overlapping concepts, than those who describe themselves as “spiritual and religious”. Reliance on single measures of religiosity like church attendance to distinguish the “religious” from the “non-religious” must inevitably lead to the “spiritual but not religious” churchgoers being assigned to a “religious” category along with traditionally oriented churchgoers, thus failing to address the non-traditional nature of this particular group’s worldview. Woodhead (1993) proposes that an individual’s conception of the sacred is a key factor in differentiating spirituality that is traditionally religious in nature from that which is non-traditional, and argues that a non-traditional approach to the divine is the central feature of what she terms the “New Spirituality”. The New Spirituality Woodhead (1993) proposes that the term New Spirituality refers to religious ways of thinking, as well as beliefs and practices, that are distinctly different from those normally associated with traditional religious thought. These appear to have been adopted by those who are disenchanted with, and/or antagonistic towards, institutionalised religion. Woodhead (1993) identifies four specific characteristics of the New Spirituality that demonstrate how it might be differentiated from the Christian tradition. Firstly, the New Spirituality rejects the foundational Christian belief that God was made manifest in Jesus Christ. Secondly, it rejects the central Christian belief in God’s omnipotence and power, and distrusts “talk of God as ‘King’, ‘Judge’, 'Almighty’ ”. Thirdly, it rejects Christian beliefs like the Trinity, or conceptions of God as transcendent or personal, and instead sees the divine as impersonal and immanent. Fourthly, the New Spirituality rejects the belief in human sinfulness and instead takes a more optimistic view of human nature, and also rejects the anthropocentric nature of Christian belief that is grounded in the incarnation, resurrection, and existence of a personal God (1993:173). It is the conception of the divine as something impersonal and immanent and different to “God” that serves to identify those whose spiritual beliefs are aligned with the 38 New Spirituality. According to Woodhead (1993), the rise of the New Spirituality can be traced to a number of movements and groups operating inside and outside of mainstream Christian churches. Woodhead (1993:174) identifies the writings on spirituality by Matthew Fox, an American Dominican friar, as having had an enormous impact both inside and outside the Church. She argues that in essence, Fox (1983) sees spirituality as panentheistic in nature, that is, viewing the world in a way that sees the whole of the cosmos as being immanent in God, and God’s creative energy as being infused in all things. This belief in the “connectedness” of life and the universe and all within it, is also promoted by the feminist spirituality movement as a central feature of spirituality (Woodhead, 1993:170). Woodhead (1993:170) suggests that the feminist spirituality movement and the movement towards a Foxian approach to spirituality, as well as parallel movements outside the church like theosophy10 and anthroposophy11, have “more or less coalesced in the last few decades to form the New Age movement”. Woodhead (1993) notes that both the New Spirituality and New Age philosophy are characterised by radical egalitarianism, where “connectedness” and “wholeness” are regarded as the ideal, where hierarchy and dualism are loathed, and “spiritual power” is seen as the only legitimate form of power and authority. Woodhead (1993:174) views this particular spiritual orientation as being representative of the more counter-capitalist and “alternative wing” of the New Age movement, consistent with the theoretical stance taken by Heelas (1993). Heelas (1993) argues that the New Age movement involves two distinct trajectories among New Age followers – and it is the characteristics of those who follow these trajectories and the activities they engage in that serve to frustrate attempts to devise a profile of a ‘typical’ New Ager. Firstly, Heelas (1993) describes the counter-capitalistic trajectory (similar to Woodhead’s “alternative wing”) as encompassing those New Agers who endeavour to “liberate themselves from institutions of modernity, in particular those involving commitment to the materialistic life” (Heelas, 1993:105-106). New Agers following this trajectory are purported to be “self-religionists” and to include those who “drop-out” of society, who travel from festival to festival, who journey to “premodern” enclaves in the East, who practice the 10 Theosophy was developed from the writings of Helena Petrovna Blavatsky, who together with Henry Steel Olcott and William Quan Judge, founded the Theosophical Society in 1875 (see Blavatsky, 1888). 11 Founded by Rudolf Steiner, and also known as Spiritual Science (Steiner, 1998 [1924]). 39 New Age directly by running spiritual therapies, trainings, workshops, and those who devote themselves to applying New Age principles and practices to change mainstream institutions. Heelas (1993:106) sees this trajectory as representing a reaction to the mainstream and a “hankering for some premodern (perhaps, better, non-modern) sense of the natural”. By contrast, the pro-capitalistic trajectory is conceived by Heelas (1993:107-109) to include those for whom the “unlocking of potential”, “controlling one’s own destiny”, and the “gaining of higher consciousness and attainment of goals” are central concerns. While this wing of the New Age is also seen to be “self-religionist” in orientation, the nature of “self” is not envisaged in a counter-cultural fashion. This particular group of New Agers involves those who have become active in the world of big business; those who see material wealth and prosperity as being perfectly compatible with spiritual progress. Aldred (2002) identifies the Human Potential movement as sharing these same features, raising doubts that the Human Potential movement differs in any meaningful way from Heelas’s pro-capitalist wing of the New Age movement. Heelas (1993:109,108) describes this trajectory as “having the best of both worlds”, since it combines a spiritual dimension with instrumentality, and as “very much bound up with the utilitarian dynamics of capitalistic modernity”. It is the two disparate expressions of the New Age movement (pro- and counter-capitalist) that make generalisations about adherents of New Age beliefs and practices so problematic. Heelas (1993:104) provides a comprehensive list of the New Age lingua franca, as formulated by William Bloom of the New Age St James’s team: All life – all existence- is the manifestation of Spirit, of the Unknowable, of that supreme consciousness known by many different names in many different cultures The purpose and dynamic of all existences is to bring Love, Wisdom, Enlightenment…into full manifestation. All religions are the expression of the same inner reality. All life, as we perceive it with the five human senses or with scientific instruments, is only the outer veil of an invisible, inner and causal reality. Similarly, human beings are two-fold creatures – with: (i) an outer temporary personality and (ii) a multi-dimensional inner being (soul or higher self). The outer personality is limited and tends towards materialism. The inner being is infinite and tends towards love. Our spiritual teachers are those souls who are liberated from the need to incarnate and who express unconditional love, wisdom and enlightenment. Some of these great beings are well known and have inspired the world religions. Some are unknown and work invisibly. All life, in all its different forms and states, is interconnected energy – and this includes our deeds, feelings and thoughts. We, therefore, work with Spirit and these energies are co-creating our reality. Although held in the dynamic of cosmic love, we are jointly responsible for the state of our selves, of our environment and of all life. 40 During this period of time, the evolution of the planet and of humanity has reached a point when we are undergoing a fundamental spiritual change in our individual and mass consciousness. That is why we talk of a New Age… This form of New Age rhetoric is common to that contained in the many publications that promote the notion of self-help, self-healing, self-empowerment, and self-actualisation that take up shelf space in bookstores around the world. Indeed, Carl Rascke (1996) identifies New Age ideology as being clearly identifiable within Bill Clinton’s and Albert George Gore Junior’s 1993 election campaign. He argues that most of the American electorate appeared to be hypnotised at that time by Gore’s call for the total transformation of American culture and the planet, as outlined in Gore’s book Earth in the Balance: Ecology and the Human Spirit (Raschke, 1996:204-205). Nevertheless, it remains that the New Age movement is difficult to define. Raschke (1996:207) notes that : News analysts and armchair sociologists have struggled for more than a decade now to define the New Age phenomenon, which even in the context of its own rhetoric has eluded definition. Considering Bloom’s “New Age creed”, it becomes evident that one striking feature of New Age philosophy is its inclusiveness. Different religions are viewed as “expressions of the same inner reality”. All life forms are embraced as “interconnected energy”, and every human being is regarded as having an “inner being that is infinite and tends towards love”. Yet there is an implicit form of hierarchy within New Age belief system. Specifically, there are the “enlightened ones”, those who have no need to incarnate – those identified as “well known” among the great religions – and those who are “unknown and work invisibly”. It is the belief in “enlightened ones” that gives numerous self-appointed New Age leaders the opportunity to attain guru status among proponents of the New Age. This is one of the many paradoxes of the New Age movement. Even though the notion that “the truth lies within” is held sacrosanct, all manner of products are being promoted as ways in which personal enlightenment can be achieved, with the sellers of these wares often being regarded as having superior knowledge of spiritual matters and the meaning of life. Aldred (2002:62) describes the New Age movement as a “primarily consumerist movement” that “reinforces consumer capitalist values” and supports this appraisal by drawing attention to the work of Hunt and McMahon (1988). They estimated that by the 1980s, the movement already represented a “burgeoning worldwide supermarket’, a “conglomeration of business ventures for marketing spirituality” generating billions of dollars 41 in sales in the United States, and which gave “every indication of growing faster in the foreseeable future than any other segment of the American economy” (Aldred, 2002:62; Hunt & McMahon, 1988:38). The emphasis placed on self-empowerment in New Age publications and other materials acts as a double-edged sword. With the individual being conceived as holding the power to change and achieve health, wealth and perfect happiness if they become aligned with universal forces and tap the power of the spiritual realm, the individual also shoulders the responsibility for their failure to meet these objectives. This makes New Age thought particularly attractive to those holding liberal ideals – blame for individual problems is laid on the individual rather than being attributed to anyone other than “self”. Gender, class, race, poverty, and culture do not feature as possible obstacles to personal wellbeing or success. Raschke (1996:215) notes that the preponderance of New Age literature “deals with social, psychological, and political topics, generally with a slant that not too many years ago was referenced as “neoliberal” ”. It is this social, psychological and political content within New Age ideology that raises questions about the influence it has had, and is having on the population in terms of mental health and social behaviour. From Woodhead’s and Heelas’s (1993) writings about the New Age movement, it becomes clear that the ideological underpinnings of the New Age framework of belief is that the “self” is the ultimate authority on the nature of the sacred and it is within this “self” that ultimate truth is recognised and experienced. Though the notion of “connectedness” is also emphasised, this connection is depersonalised in nature and conceived to exist at the non- corporeal level. Colin Campbell (2001) draws particular attention to the individualistic nature of New age spirituality. He argues that the individual remains the basic unit within the New Age theodicy and that there is “little self-transcendence through identification with collectivities” (2001:79). Indeed, his assessment of the New Age worldview suggests that it is anti-establishment in nature through its position involving: …a condemnation of contemporary, materialist, scientist and Christian-dominated Western civilization as inimical to true spiritual awareness, and hence as being the central obstacle to enlightenment and true spiritual progress (2001:78). Despite his reference to the condemnation of materialism within a New Age worldview, Campbell (2001), in agreement with Heelas, acknowledges the pro-capitalist orientation of some New Agers. This apparent contradiction is one that pro-capitalist New Agers themselves 42 appear to have little trouble justifying. There appears to be a tendency for New Agers to be able to separate their own pro-capitalist leanings from the pro-capitalistic nature of Western civilisation by rationalising that money is for them just one form of “spiritual energy” (see Aldred, 2002). Some have argued that contemporary religiosity in general is consumeristic in nature and that this is a characteristic of postmodernity. For example, Davie (2004) suggests that one key difference between religion in postmodernity and religion in modernity is that the former is based on consumption, while the latter is based on obligation. However, the promotion of others’ interests over self-interest and social obligation is a cornerstone of Christianity and other mainstream religions. By contrast, New Age philosophy seems to give obligation little consideration, and instead emphasises self-empowerment, self-actualisation, and the “self” as the primary arbiter of truth and reality. Findings from qualitative research conducted by Possamai (2000) lend support to this view. From analysis of interviews with 39 informants described as proponents of New Age spirituality, Possamai (2000:369) notes that “nearly all my informants locate authority in the religious quest in the inner self” and that informants tended to have an aversion to “any dogmatic message from any authority beyond the self”. Campbell (2001:81) summarises the New Age theodicy as endorsing “a remarkably individualist, a-social ethic”. It is noteworthy that Campbell’s assessment of the New Age theodicy as being a-social and individualistic, parallels that made by Georg Simmel in regard to Buddhism. Simmel (1997[1898-1918]:160) argued that Buddhism, unlike most Christian culture, lacks social norms because there is an absence of any “correlation between social and religious obligation”. This lack of a correlation between social and religious obligation is the rationale used by Simmel (1997[1898-1918]:160) to conclude that Buddhism is “not a religion”. It is interesting to note that Buddhist beliefs such as a belief in reincarnation and the belief that self-enlightenment removes the need for any future incarnation are both characteristic of the New Age lingua franca as identified by Heelas (1993). Meditation is also promoted strongly within New Age circles. Indeed, New Age beliefs and Buddhism have been grouped together as representative of a specific sub-category under “alternative spiritualities” in the Australian study of spirituality by Kaldor and colleagues (2004). Yet the systems of belief promoted by Buddhism and the New Spirituality are not one and the same. Overall, the Buddhist-like beliefs adopted among Westerners are not linked to familial, ethnic or cultural background, or notions of asceticism, but represent one part of an eclectic mix of various beliefs and practices, borrowed at will from multiple and diverse religious traditions. Woodhead (1993:170) notes that “myths, rituals, gods and goddesses are apparently plucked at random 43 from available sources” by those who are part of the post-Christian feminist spirituality movement. Yet, self-selection of specific beliefs and practices is not unique to feminist spirituality and is commonplace within the New Age movement more generally. In essence, the New Spirituality is akin to a mass conversion from Christianity to a “self-religionist” state. Any belief and/or practice from any religious tradition can be legitimately adopted, “tried out”, and replaced for some other belief or practice at any time – since “all religions reflect the same inner reality” and individuals are seen as having ultimate authority over what they believe and do. Lyon (1993:117) describes the New Age approach as having: …little to do with the conventional transcendent monotheism of Christianity and much to do with a marketplace – shopping mall or circus – of religious and quasi-religious elements focused on self and on choice. Having identified characteristics of the New Spirituality, the eclectic approach to beliefs and practices that is associated with this form of spirituality, the individualistic, consumeristic, and a-social ethic that permeates this non-religious approach to the sacred, the following section identifies the theoretical underpinnings of this thesis. Sociological theories of religion, spirituality, mental health and social behaviour The following discussion identifies social theories of religion as providing a theoretical basis for investigating the possibility that mental health and behavioural outcomes differ according to R/S beliefs, church attendance and religious background in today’s society. Durkheimian theory Sociologists and historians then increasingly come together in their common affirmation that religion is the most primitive of all social phenomena. It is from it that have emerged, through successive transformations, all the other manifestations of collective activity – law, morality, art, science, political forms, etc. In principle everything is religious (Durkheim, 1982 [1897]:173). Religion was a central focus for Emile Durkheim in the development of his theory of society. He perceived religion to be a means by which moral frameworks were created, social norms were reinforced, and group solidarity was promoted (Durkheim, 1968 [1915]). The central thesis of Durkheim’s (1968 [1915]) work entitled The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life, in which Australian Aboriginal religions were used as an exemplar for his theory of religion, was that religious beliefs and rites are developed by groups as a means to preserve 44 social order and that religion is fundamental to the preservation of society itself. He referred to the “totemic principle” as being representative of the clan itself: The god of the clan, the totemic principle, can therefore be nothing else that the clan itself, personified and represented to the imagination under the visible form of the animal or vegetable which serves as totem (Durkheim, 1968 [1915]):206). For Durkheim (1968 [1915]):209), the totemic principle was not just applicable to what he regarded as ‘primitive’ religions. Rather, he saw it as something that must always “penetrate and organise itself within us” to ensure the survival of individuals and of society. We now see the real reason why the gods cannot do without their worshippers any more than these cannot do without their gods; it is because society, of which the gods are only a symbolic expression, cannot do without individuals any more than these can do without society (Durkheim, 1968 [1915]):347). Thus, according to a Durkheimian perspective, religious beliefs are not just important for individuals, but are of paramount importance to the clan, group or society to which an individual belongs. Durkheim (1968 [1915]) argued that religious beliefs and rites are those that are associated with membership to formal organisations, where norms, values, beliefs and practices are shared; giving rise to moral communities to which individuals belong. Durkheim (1968 [1915]:16) held that religious beliefs and practices are “collective representations” that require “immense cooperation”, and that they form the basic components of religion. These collective representations were conceived by him as promoting a “collective conscience”. Durkheim (1968 [1915]) distinguished the rites and beliefs that took place within these moral communities from those that exist without the support of a cohesive group or formal organisation, and termed the latter magic. Durkheim (1968 [1915]:44) regarded magic as lacking any “binding effect” between individuals, even if it involved as many adherents as those involved in a “real religion”, arguing that no lasting bonds were formed between either the “magician” and the individual, or between these individual adherents. Durkheim (1968 [1915]:44) likened these individuals to the “sick clientele of a physician”, since they might not even know one another or have relations with one another at all. Thus, from a Durkheimian perspective, institutionalised forms of religion serve to strengthen society and the individuals living within it, while “magic” provides neither of these benefits. He justified this argument by 45 highlighting that that there is “no church of magic” (1968 [1915]:44). Even though Durkheim’s theory of religion has been strongly criticised as involving a circular argument (the sacred is the social and the religious is the sacred, and so the religious is the social), and for being too reductionistic (Pals, 1996:115-117), his study of suicide provided support for his view that religion and societal wellbeing are inextricably linked. His study involved analysis of national European data on cases of suicide and mental illness per 100,000 inhabitants from the latter part of the 1800s. Durkheim (1952 [1897]) found that rates of mental illness and suicide differed according to religious faith. Durkheim observed that Jews had the highest rates of mental illness, that Protestants had slightly higher rates of mental illness than Catholics, but that there was no direct and positive relationship between rates of mental illness and suicide. Durkheim (1952 [1897]:73) showed that although Jews had the highest rates of mental illness, their rates of suicide were the lowest. He found this especially interesting given that Judaism was the one religious faith of those he examined that did not proscribe suicide (1952 [1897]:73). Durkheim (1952 [1897]) also found that Protestants had disproportionately higher rates of suicide than Catholics given their relative rates of mental illness and thus concluded that suicide must be more linked to group norms, experience and ideology than it is to individual mental states. These findings led him to devise a typology of suicide, including four separate suicide types that reflected differing levels of social integration and moral regulation12. This seminal work remains foundational to contemporary theories that address the social origins of suicide, mental illness and antisocial behaviour, since Durkheim succeeded in showing that “a highly individual and personal phenomenon is explicable through the social structure and its ramifying functions” (Simpson, 1952:10). While Durkheim (1968 [1915]) also speculated that privatised religion would increasingly replace membership to religious groups, his writings gave this minimal attention. More recently however, Thomas Luckmann (2003) has dealt with this very issue. He tracks religion from archaic times to the present, and in doing so, provides a way of explaining declining levels of institutionalised religion and increasing levels of privatised religion. The evolution of religion from archaic times to the present The survival of religion into the present day has led numerous authors to conclude that religion is intrinsic to the human condition, and to reject the notion that religion is a mere remnant of past primitive societies, the preserve of the uneducated, the superstitious and the irrational. Luckmann (2003:276) describes the intrinsic nature of religion as follows: 12 Including egoistic, altruistic, anomic, and fatalistic suicide. 46 …religion is not a passing phase in the evolution of mankind [sic] but a universal aspect of the condition humana. Appearing under different socio-structural conditions in various historical forms, it remains a constituent element of human life, bonding the individual human being, most particularly its experiences of transcendence, to a collective view of the good life. In mentioning the “good life”, Luckmann is not referring here to some individually fashioned prescription for personal contentment and happiness, but rather to the sense of morality that guides human action, “a coherent set of notions of what is right and wrong” (Luckmann, 2003:276). Central to Luckmann’s theory of religion and society is the notion that people’s world-views are “constructed as meaningful wholes integrating the sense of diverse levels of human experience”, with this experience being seen to encompass the subjective experiences “of everyday reality” as well as those “of extraordinary realities”. Here Luckmann (2003:277) takes a phenomenological approach in arguing that every normal human being is aware that the world itself (and things within the world) transcends the individual. He regards an individual’s subjective experience of transcendence as taking place at three distinct levels, with two of these being encountered in ordinary everyday experience through the “continuous minor transcendences set by the boundaries experienced by time and space, and the intermediate transcendence defined by the otherness of fellow beings” respectively (Luckmann, 2003:277). The third level involves “the great transcendences experienced in dreams, ecstasies, meditation, extreme pain and in the sight of death” (Luckmann, 2003:277). Collective representations of the “great transcendences” are those that Luckmann (2003:277) identifies as being conventionally viewed as “properly religious”. Luckmann (2003:277) emphasises that the construction of worldviews, especially their religious core, are influenced by the socio-historical context in which they arise and are determined by different forms of social organisation. Then taking an anthropological approach, he identifies four distinct stages in the evolution of religion from archaic times to the present, each corresponding to particular forms of social organization. Firstly, he argues that in archaic societies, characterised by a simple division of labour, the sacred was based on the entire social structure, with there being little differentiation of religious functions except for the special roles assigned to ancestors, totems, and shamans. Luckmann (2003:278-279) identifies the second stage as taking place about four to six thousand years ago, marked by the progressive functional differentiation of social institutions, an increasing complexity in the division of labour, political organisation, and the formation of social classes. During this stage “religion began to achieve a distinct institutional location in the social order” (Luckmann, 2003:279). During the third stage, greater institutional specialisation was accompanied by 47 religion acquiring a “visibly separate location in a special set of social institutions”, exemplified by the development of the Christian churches (Luckmann, 2003:279). Finally, Luckmann (2003) suggests that the emergence of a fourth stage in the evolution of religion, which he calls the “privatized, social form of religion”, is now evident. He argues that this stage is characterised by a “genuinely new arrangement of the relation between collective representations and the new social structures” (Luckmann, 2003:279). Characteristic of these new arrangements is the “de-monopolization of the production and distribution of world- views” and development of an “open market”, with collective religious representations being produced and supplied by churches, sects, new religious organisations, New Age commercial enterprises, and the mass media (Luckmann, 2003:279). While it is difficult to know the extent that television and the internet serve to feed privatised forms of religion, through their respective roles in the distribution of R/S worldviews, it is worth noting that religious television programming accounted for just 1 per cent of all television programming in the United States in 1977, and that by 1996, this figure had risen to 16 per cent (Shorto, 1997; see also Zinnbauer, Pargament, & Scott, 1999). Luckmann (2003:282) defines the new privatised social form of religion as: …an absence of plausible and generally obligatory social models for persisting, universal human experiences of transcendence and the search for a meaningful life. Rather than this fourth stage of religious evolution having emerged as a consequence of “the spread of secularisation”, Luckmann (2003:279-280) conceives that it is the result of the combined influence of functional specialization within the major public domains, the freeing of these domains from traditional religious norms, as well as modern day pluralism that makes different worldviews available to everyone. Certainly, the empirical data discussed in Chapter Two supports Luckmann’s notion of an open market of worldviews. Debates continue among sociologists however, about the extent that secularisation theory is able to explain decreasing levels of institutionalised religion and increasing levels of privatised religion. The process of secularisation and its influence on religion During the past four decades, sociological attention on religion appears to have been preoccupied with the process of secularisation and its capacity to explain the gradual disestablishment of church power during the post World War II period, rather than the possible repercussions of this change on the mental health and social behaviour of populations. Yet this preoccupation with explaining the reasons for religious change is relevant 48 to the religion-mental health connection, since disenchantment with religious institutions appears to be a key factor in the shift away from institutionalised to privatised religion. This disenchantment implies changing beliefs, norms and values that have, according to a Durkheimian perspective, direct implications for society in general. According to the secularisation thesis, the transformation of social structures and political institutions into secularised entities leads to the churches losing power over the public, resulting in less public involvement in religion (Phillips, 2004). While Berger (1968) was a strong proponent of secularisation theory and predicted that by the 21st century religious believers would only be found in small sects within a sea of secular culture, he has since recanted his theoretical position of the late sixties (see Stark, 1999). He now concedes that the importance of religion did not lessen as he had presupposed, once there was separation between Church and State. Religious and spiritual beliefs in some form continue to be held by the majority of populations, and many new religious organisations have developed throughout the West (see Sherkat & Ellison, 1999). In addition, the diminishing power of institutionalised religion observed among mainstream Christian churches over the past few decades has not extended to fundamentalist or charismatic religions (Marty & Appleby, 1991; NCLS, 2004). Pentecostalists and charismatics were estimated to number over 400 million worldwide by the 1990s (Cox, 1995). Following recognition by numerous sociologists that the secularisation thesis failed to explain observed changes in religious expression during the last half of the 20th century, a “new paradigm” of secularisation emerged, largely based on observations of religion in the United States (Phillips, 2004). Within this new paradigm, secularisation is seen to have forced religious organisations to compete with one another for adherents, thus creating a climate where levels of church participation are heightened (Phillips, 2004:139; see also Warner, 1993). However, the competition thesis is inadequate to the task of explaining contemporary religiosity in Western countries like Australia where church attendance levels are low, but the majority of the population report being affiliated with some religion (ABS, 2004b) and having some sort of religious or spiritual belief (Francis & Kaldor, 2002). It may be however, that Australians are participating in the activities of new religious groups and organisations, and that this kind of activity fails to be captured by measures of church attendance. The competition thesis may therefore apply to Australia, but this will remain unclear until empirical data is available that taps involvement with new religious groups and organisations. While debates about the capacity of secularisation theory to explain patterns of religiosity at the societal level persist to the present (Sherkat & Ellison, 1999) and Luckmann’s 49 “open market” perspective suggests that it is not just secularisation but the combined influence of both secularisation and modernisation that explains contemporary religiosity, Georg Simmel’s writings from around the end of the 19th and beginning of the 20th centuries offer a somewhat different hypothesis about the reasons for religious change. The conflict of modern culture Like Luckmann, Simmel (1997[1898-1918]) saw modernisation as being integral to the shift away from institutionalised forms of religion during the 20th century, but held a contrasting view about the mechanisms involved. The difference in Simmel’s explanation rests on his take of what religiousness actually is, as well as the impact of science. Simmel (1997[1898-1918]:5) believed that a state of religiousness is not defined by its content, has little to do with collective representations of transcendence, and is instead “an attitude of soul”, a functional human quality that “entirely determines some individuals and exists in only rudimentary form in others”. Indeed, it is the non-religious in Simmel’s terms (that is, those without an attitude of the soul) that most need religion in order that they gain some sense of moral and social duty. Like Durkheim, Simmel (1997[1898-1918]:156) saw strong connections between an individual’s regard for the sacred and his or her behaviour within society, arguing that an individual’s behaviour towards the “deity” is analogous to his or her behaviour towards society. He believed that the pattern of relationship between a human being and his or her God “unmistakably reiterates the behavioural patterns that exist between the individual and his [sic] social group” (1997[1898-1918]:157). Simmel (1997[1898-1918]:20) also argued that religious changes that have transpired within modern societies reflect the “conflict of modern culture”. Simmel (1997[1898-1918]:20) believed that while science had in no way “deadened” the religious “yearning” because it did not have the capacity to prove or disprove the existence of God, it had made people re-evaluate the content of their religious beliefs, thereby leading them to seek different goals and paths. He also argued that because religions that were based on church tradition could no longer be maintained, a persisting religious urge led people to “satisfy their religious needs by means of mysticism” (Simmel, 1997[1898- 1918]:20). Even though Simmel’s observations and conclusions are based on events that took place around the end of the 19th and beginning of the 20th centuries, his theory of religious change remains relevant to the present given observed patterns of paranormal and New Age beliefs within the United States in the latter part of the 20th and early part of the 21st centuries (as identified in Chapter Two). 50 Theoretical framework for the current study The theories of religion presented by Durkheim, Luckmann, and Simmel and the characteristics of the New Spirituality identified by Woodhead (1993) provide the theoretical framework on which this thesis is based. Luckmann’s theory suggests that through the processes of secularisation and modernisation, people are less constrained by traditional religious norms and beliefs, leaving them free to choose from an open market of worldviews to suit their individual needs. Durkheim’s and Simmel’s respective theories of religion in particular, raise the possibility that this development holds implications for mental health and social behaviour at an individual and societal level, given that contemporary religiosity is increasingly independent of group membership and beliefs and practices are highly individualised. Even forms of religiosity that do involve engagement in activities organised by religious organisations cannot be assumed to represent adherence to a particular set of shared beliefs, norms and values, given that there is now an open market of worldviews available to churchgoers and non-churchgoers alike. Apart from two contemporary social capital theorists, Coleman (1990) and Putnam (2000), little sociological attention appears to have been given in recent years to the possible negative repercussions that reductions in religious membership and more individualised forms of religiosity might have for mental health and social behaviour among populations. Even Coleman and Putnam have given limited attention to this possibility. These two theorists both identify reduced levels of membership of religious organisations as just one indicator among numerous others, of declining community and civic participation in the United States, framing this trend in terms of a loss on social capital within American society. Putnam (2000) raised the question in his book Bowling Alone of whether declining levels of social capital might explain increasing rates of depression and suicide among younger generations in the United States. Yet, the shift away from traditional religious thought to alternative belief systems, as well as its possible repercussions for mental health and social behaviour at a population level, were not addressed by Putnam directly. The general lack of interest in the relationship between contemporary religiosity and mental health and social behaviour within the discipline of sociology is nothing new however. Luckmann (1967) noted nearly four decades ago, that although Durkheim (1952 [1897]; 1968 [1915]) and Weber (1930) had both provided theories about religion that could be used to test numerous hypotheses, sociological research into religion had largely been “narrow and trivial” and “regressive” in nature in the post- Durkheimian and Weberian period. This criticism remains pertinent today. The general disinterest among sociologists in applying Durkheimian theory to 51 contemporary religiosity no doubt reflects the general loss of favour among sociologists in the 1970s of “evolutionary functionalist theories” and their objection to the notion of a “unified collective consciousness” (Sherkat & Ellison, 1999:364). Paradoxically, the central mantra of the New Spirituality is one of an underlying spiritual connection between all things, and represents a widespread belief in a “unified collective consciousness” of sorts, albeit at the ‘spiritual level’. Despite the individualistic nature of the New Spirituality identified earlier, it remains that the rise of this alternative form of religiosity reflects grand scale dissatisfaction with institutionalised forms of religious authority and dogma and thus a common response of disaffection among the population. Some measure of dissent is also evident among those who maintain involvement with religious institutions as demonstrated by churchgoers claiming the right to follow the dictates of their own beliefs rather than blindly follow religious doctrine or authority. The socio-cultural, political and economic context of this claim to personal autonomy and its promotion within the New Spirituality warrants further sociological attention, given that the rise in individual authority over religious matters has taken place at a time in history when consumerism, capitalism, and individualism are central features of society. Theoretically, the New Spirituality corresponds to Durkheim’s notion of “magic” and Simmel’s identification of a move towards “mysticism”. Both magic and mysticism represent non-institutionalised forms of religiosity that lack group cohesion, group unity, and group solidarity. The New Spirituality is also consistent with both Luckmann’s and Simmel’s theories about the influence of modernization on the development of privatised forms of religion. On the one hand, it fits Luckmann’s theory that modernization and pluralism has led to an open market of religious worldviews as evidenced by the religious eclecticism observed among those who embrace the particular worldview promoted by the New Spirituality. On the other, Simmel’s notion that the conflict of modern culture has led many to reassess the content of their religious beliefs and seek new paths and goals is consistent with characteristics of the New Spirituality – beliefs that are mystic in orientation, which represent a departure from traditional Christian thought, and which reject religious authority. The ideology associated with the New Spirituality has the potential to translate to differences in mental health and social behaviour compared to traditional religious ideology, because of its individualistic approach and lack of social norms. Several questions arise from this discussion. Are non- traditional R/S beliefs linked to poorer mental health outcomes compared to those who maintain a traditional belief in God? Are those who reject a traditional God and instead endorse a non-traditional belief in a spiritual or higher power more antisocial in their 52 behaviour than those who endorse a traditional belief in God? Since current trends indicate that those who attend church are now likely to behave according to their own moral dictates instead of being guided by religious doctrine, does church attendance protect against antisocial behaviour in today’s world? While it is unlikely that all those who hold conceptions of the divine as a spiritual or higher power would consciously describe themselves as belonging to the New Spirituality, it remains that this alternative approach to the divine is characteristic of New Age thought. Investigation into the mental health and social behaviour of those who endorse such beliefs provides one avenue to explore connections between New Age thought and wellbeing. Discussion so far has focused predominantly on religion and spirituality from a social perspective. The psychological literature highlights the possible benefits and harms that may arise from religion and spirituality according to an individual perspective. This literature also provides insight into current debates related to the study of religion and spirituality and reveals the attempts being made currently to address conceptual issues surrounding these terms. Since the bulk of empirical attention given to religion, spirituality, mental health and social behaviour has taken place within the psychology of religion, it is necessary to examine the theoretical perspectives associated with this discipline prior to discussion of the empirical literature related to these topics in Chapter Four. Psychological perspectives on religion and spirituality A brief overview of psychiatric and psychological theories is provided in this section, outlining their correspondence and lack of correspondence with sociological theories. Subsequent to this discussion, attention is given to the theoretical ‘crisis’ that is being faced within the psychology of religion since this has direct relevance for the theoretical approach being taken in this thesis. The individual approach to religion and spirituality Traditionally, the main factor that has differentiated psychological theories of religion from sociological ones is their tendency to be far less concerned with broad social processes and social change, and their primary focus being on religion and religiosity at an individual level. However, during the past decade in particular, the social contexts in which religion and spirituality arise appear to be increasingly acknowledged within psychological perspectives, leading to considerable overlap between these two disciplinary approaches (see Hill, Pargament, Hood Jr et al., 2000). Nevertheless, it becomes apparent when reading the 53 psychological literature on religion and mental health that the importance of religion within a psychological perspective, rests on the ways in which religious beliefs and practices influence an individual’s wellbeing rather than the extent that they contribute to overall patterns of wellbeing at a societal level. As a result, there is a tendency within the psychology of religion to view religiousness and spirituality as similar entities, since they both represent a means for individuals to negotiate daily life. This approach serves to de-emphasise the role of broader social processes involved in the uptake of particular beliefs and practices in the first place, and thus the contribution of broad social changes to mental health and behavioural outcomes. In order to understand the present status of psychological theories about religion and spirituality, it is necessary to devote some preliminary discussion to theories relating specifically to the religion-mental health relationship to show how the relatively new focus on spirituality has both extended the scope of psychological enquiry and exacerbated the problems that plague the psychology of religion. Psychological perspectives on religion and mental health and social behaviour One striking feature of psychological theories of religion is their polarised nature, with some theories emphasising the positive influence of religion and others identifying it negative influence. Krause (1993) argues that the overall influence of religion on mental health can be conceived as being attributable to three main components – the organisational component, the religious beliefs component, and the subjective religiosity component of religion. The theoretical underpinnings of the religion-mental health connection are discussed below according to these three components, with the positive and negative aspects being addressed for each component. The organisational and religious beliefs components Positive influence Psychological perspectives on the organisational component of religion share similarities with sociological perspectives, in that they view involvement in religious organisations as providing the individual with both social support and a sense of belonging, with each of these factors being conceived to confer mental health benefits such as protection from affective disorders like depression (see McCullough & Larson, 1999). James ([1902] 1985), in line with social modelling theory, argues that religious icons act as models of charity and altruism, thereby encouraging pro-social behaviour. Different mechanisms are conceived to be involved in the religion-mental health connection in regard to religious beliefs, which Krause (1993) 54 defines as the core beliefs that are associated with a person’s religion as well as an individual’s perceived relationship with God. Here, a beneficial influence is seen to come from religion’s capacity to relieve anxiety about death (Piven, 2003) and from the sense of purpose and meaning it provides individuals, thereby enabling them to cope better than non-religious individuals when faced with stressful circumstances (Silberman, 2005). In addition, Saunders (2002) emphasises religion’s capacity to provide beneficial neurological effects, arguing that strong religious beliefs induce positive mind states and that these effects translate to better health. Freud ([1927] 1961) too, acknowledged that religious beliefs served a useful function, in that they helped individuals to control what he regarded to be an innate tendency towards destructive behaviour, arising directly from sexual impulses and narcissism. Freud ([1913] 1919) conceived God to be a projection of the superego, an imaginary father who reminded individuals of taboos against incest and murder. However, despite his acknowledgment of the positive influence of religion on social behaviour, Freud held a very different view about religion’s relationship with mental health. Negative influence Freud (1961 [1927]) believed that religion was based on illusion, that the religious inclination represented a psychopathological state, and that through psychotherapy, the religious would eventually discard religion upon realising its illusory nature. This position shows some affinity with that held by Karl Marx (1970 [1818-1883]), who saw religion as being the “opium of the people” and the “sigh of the oppressed creature”, with it providing only “illusory happiness”. More recently Ellis (1988) also argued along Freudian lines, that the less religious people are, the more emotionally healthy they will be. Ellis (1992:429) regards “pious theistic religion” as being “inimical to mental health in many instances”. Beit-Hallahmi (2001:52-53) warns of the dangers associated with religious conversion, and regards all instances of religious conversion as being rooted in psychopathology, with conversion being seen to represent “self-destructive regression” based on an attempt to “cope with reality”. A somewhat different approach is taken by Paloutzian and colleagues (1999:1047-48) who argue that religious conversion has minimal influence over personality traits and temperament, but that it can have “profound, life transforming changes in mid-level functions such as goals, feelings, attitudes, and behaviors, and in the more self-defining personality functions such as identity and life meaning”. They also suggest that effects are independent of whether “the process of conversion is sudden or gradual, active or passive, and to a traditional Western or Eastern religion or to a new religious movement” (1999:1048). 55 Joseph (1998:221) identifies a range of harms that have been attributed to religion, based on the writings of Pruyser (1977) including: …sacrifice of intellect; rationalisation of hatred, aggression and prejudice; thought control and promotion of excessive dependency; surrender of agency, dissociation and disavowal; justification for being judgemental and insensitive to situations; displacement of the body (self- punishment and asceticism); and obsessional thinking (as in guilt). Support for the view that religion holds potential to cause serious harm comes from observations of numerous instances of homicide and suicide that took place among specific religious cults and new religious movements (NRMs) in the late 1970s, 1980s and 1990s. These events, which became known as the “cult wars”, include those that took place in Jonestown under the leadership of Jim Jones in 1978, in various locations around the world among members of the Order of the Solar Temple, and in California among members of the Heaven’s Gate cult, under the leadership of Marshall Applegate (2002). Pruyser’s (1977) range of religion’s potential harms identified above are characteristic of the behaviours observed among those involved in these events. Two main theories have been proposed to explain the violence and death that characterised the cult wars. Firstly, Beit-Hallahmi (2001) argues that cult leaders and cult followers have matching “pathology”. This may explain why cult followers are attracted to cult leaders, regardless of cult leaders’ bizarre beliefs and behaviours, and the willingness of followers to carry out their leaders’ instructions even though these are destructive in nature (Introvigne, 2002). Even though Beit-Hallahmi (2001:55) regards most cult leaders as being “con artists” and “religious hustlers”, he dismisses the notion that cult followers are mere victims of their leaders and assigns responsibility for violent behaviour on both cult leaders and followers alike (Introvigne, 2002). By contrast, brainwashing theory demonises cult leaders specifically. Proponents of brainwashing theory suggest that “nobody can perform such extreme acts as ritualized homicide and suicide without having been brainwashed by an evil guru” (Introvigne, 2002:216). While it could be argued that the violence and death that characterise the cult wars represent an extreme case of religious perversion among a small minority of the religiously inclined, and thus these events are largely irrelevant to religion and spirituality more generally, it remains that the dynamic relationship between religious beliefs and the organisational structure formed around these beliefs (including both leaders and followers) led to these events taking place. Even though brainwashing theories have largely lost favour within academic scholarship, the notion that various revivalists, preachers, and cults use brainwashing techniques persists to the present (Introvigne, 2004). Of course, acts and threats of terrorism that now exist within the 56 contemporary world serve as a constant reminder of the central role religious beliefs can play in the justification of aggressive, homicidal and suicidal behaviour. The subjective religiosity component Positive and negative influences Krause (1993) defines subjective religiosity as referring to levels of religious commitment and its self-perceived importance in people’s lives. The positive influence of religious commitment within the family unit has been theorised by Bergin (1988) to lead to better psychological adjustment among children as they reach adulthood. He views positive integration of religion into family life as a source of stability for the developing child. The subjective nature of religiosity is also central to Allport’s (1950) theory which differentiates between immature and mature forms of religion. According to Allport (1950), mature religion serves as an integrative and organising function in the personality, thereby producing a consistent morality. By contrast, immature religion is conceived as being more involved with self-gratification, resulting in a lack of integration of the personality and thus a lack of self- reflective insight (Ventis, 1995). This differentiation between mature and immature religion led subsequently to the development of the two concepts extrinsic and intrinsic religion. Ventis (1995:35) describes extrinsic religion as religion that is used to gain particular ends such as emotional/social support or social status. By contrast, intrinsic religion applies to those for whom religion is a main motive in life, and for whom religion is internalised and fully lived (Ventis, 1995:35). Consistent with the theoretical framework on which these concepts are based, studies using measures of extrinsic and intrinsic religion have generally found that extrinsic religion is negatively related, and intrinsic religion positively related, to mental health and social behaviour (see review article by Ventis, 1995), thus lending legitimacy to the intrinsic/extrinsic approach to religion. In combination, the above mentioned theories identify the multidimensional nature of religion. The concept religion has thus attracted substantial criticism from those who believe that religion is too complex to be studied within a scientific paradigm, with some even arguing that the study of religion should be abandoned altogether. Indeed Wulff (1996) stated a decade ago, that the status of the study of religion within psychology was “precarious” and that there were relatively few credible contributors to this field of enquiry. Hill et al. (2000:51) note that although the psychology of religion had impressive beginnings with the pioneering works of William James and G. Stanley Hall at the beginning of the 20th century, it fell from favour in the “heyday of behaviourism” and is “still overlooked, if not bypassed, by the whole 57 of psychology”. The shifting of focus from religion to both religion and spirituality in recent years means that another dimension has been added to that already studied within the psychology of religion, thus compounding the many conceptual and methodological issues that already surround this area of enquiry. Spirituality and religion: the theoretical ‘crisis’ With spirituality becoming a whole new focus for investigation within the psychology of religion, Pargament (1999) warned at the end of the 20th century that approaches to the study of both religion and spirituality lacked grounding in either theory or research and that this posed serious dangers for the psychology of religion. Since this time, the empirical literature which examines associations between religion, spirituality, and health has grown, and there is also evidence to suggest that psychiatric patients want clinicians to consider their religious and spiritual beliefs when devising treatment plans (D'Souza, 2002). The growing empirical literature on links between religion/spirituality and mental health, as well as patient demand, both appear to be instrumental in religion and spirituality gaining increasing recognition as a new frontier for research within the mental health domain. Blass (2001:79) for example, has proposed a conceptual framework to facilitate an interaction between the fields of psychiatry and religion in order to “further the care of individuals, as well as to promote research into and teaching of the psychiatry-religion interaction”. However, it remains that research into religion/spirituality is largely evidence-driven, leaving the psychology of religion without solid, coherent theories upon which to base strategies that are aimed at meeting the objectives outlined by Blass. It would seem no exaggeration to suggest that the psychology of religion is undergoing a theoretical ‘crisis’. The development of sound theoretical frameworks for religion and spirituality is frustrated by two major obstacles. Firstly, the myriad ways in which spirituality is conceptualised serve to block consensus on how to define religion and spirituality for research purposes. Unruh, Versnel, and Kerr (2002) examined the ways in which spirituality had been defined within the health literature using electronic databases including Medline, CINAHL, PsychInfo and Sociofile, and found that more than 80 different definitions for spirituality had been used since 1980. The current lack of consensus on how religion and spirituality might best be defined serves to exacerbate the difficulties encountered in interpreting research evidence related to religion, through the need to interpret evidence with not just religion or religiousness in mind, but spirituality as well. As discussed in Chapter One, the lack of conceptual uniformity means that findings based on singular measures of religion/spirituality may be largely uninterpretable because 58 there is no clear theoretical basis from which to assess the types of mechanisms that might be involved. Secondly, religion is an emotive topic. Blass (2001) notes that “psychiatric theories about religion have often been founded [more] upon values and beliefs than upon scientific facts”. The threat to objectivity that personal beliefs and values pose to the scientific study of religion and spirituality has also been highlighted by Pargament (1999) and Zinnbauer (1999). Both have warned against the polarization of views whereby religion is conceived as being “good” and spirituality as being “bad”, or vice versa. However, it is doubtful that those who hold strong religious views will heed this warning. For example, researchers Taylor, Mitchell, Kenan and Tacker (2000:425) received comments from Canadian occupational therapists being surveyed about spirituality and its role within occupational therapy like: I disagree that OTs should discuss spirituality with their clients, unless they are of Christian faith. There are too many religions out there and they mess up people’s minds. Jesus is the only True God. Another respondent stated: If any therapists are encouraging any spirituality (i.e., New Age, meditation, Moslem, Jehovah’s Witness, Mormon, etc.) other than Christ, they are walking in Satanic Spirituality and the forces of evil are alive and well, being encouraged by them. Anything other than Christian spirituality is of the Devil (Taylor, Mitchell, Kenan et al., 2000:425). If hypothetically, this survey had instead focussed on Christianity and occupational therapy, researchers may easily have received comments from those who are antagonistic towards Christianity identifying their disapproval of any Christian beliefs or practices being discussed with clients. The terms religion and spirituality must necessarily be interpreted by individuals through a filter of their own perceptions, experiences, and values. This applies equally to those who are studied and those who conduct research. Even though a scientific approach to the study of religion has objectivity as a basic premise, the study of religion/spirituality is thought to be especially vulnerable to bias from researchers’ subjectivity in selecting the studies they report in scientific papers (see Johnson, De Li, Larson, & McCullough, 2000; Wong, Rew, & Slaikeu, 2006). While the quest for scientific rigour will help to ensure that personal biases do not compromise the findings from research investigating links between religion, spirituality and health, the conceptualisation of religion and spirituality as discrete concepts for research 59 purposes remains especially problematic. Hill et al. (2000) have nevertheless sought to devise a set of criteria for distinguishing spirituality from religion that are value-free. They use an approach much like that taken in devising clinical criteria found in the DSM-IV (see American Psychiatric Association, 2000). Hill et al. (2000:66) propose that both religion and spirituality be assessed in the first instance according to Criterion A: The feelings, thoughts, experiences, and behaviours that arise from a search for the sacred. The term “search” refers to attempts to identify, articulate, maintain, or transform. The term “sacred” refers to a being, object, Ultimate Reality, or Ultimate Truth as perceived by the individual. This is the sole criterion for spirituality and in order to distinguish religion from spirituality, two additional criteria are identified: AND/OR: B. A search for non-sacred goals (such as identity, belongingness, meaning, health, or wellness) in a context that has as its primary goal the facilitation of (A): AND: C. The means and methods (e.g., rituals or prescribed behaviors) of the search that receive validation and support from within an identifiable group of people. Hill and colleagues (2000) also provide a comprehensive analysis of the many issues that surround the study of religion and spirituality, as well as its importance for understanding health and wellbeing. They identify religion and spirituality as being relevant to: individual development across the lifespan; the formation of social norms; cognitive function; affect and emotion; personality; drug and alcohol use; the provision of alternative welfare programs; approaches that emphasise the individual’s role in preventing and curing illness; and the diminishing of deviant behaviour like theft, violence towards others, hedonism, and extramarital sexual activity (Hill, Pargament, Hood Jr et al., 2000:53-56). The efficacy of their proposed criteria for progressing an understanding of the relationships between religion and mental health, and spirituality and mental health, remains questionable however. Certainly, they have addressed many of the difficulties that might be encountered when attempting to distinguish religion from spirituality, such as multiple spiritualities being endorsed by a single 60 individual and co-occurrence of religion and spirituality. They have argued convincingly that emerging cults and sects can justifiably be regarded as involving both religion and spirituality, even if they involve rejection “of and by the host culture” (Hill, Pargament, Hood Jr et al., 2000:80). This serves to ensure that due consideration is given to the collective nature of new religious groups, which traditional approaches to religion have tended to ignore through their focus on “attendance at church” or “participation in religious activities”. However, it remains that the concepts religion and spirituality may be too broad for the purposes of identifying the ways in which differing beliefs and worldviews might translate to differential mental health and social behavioural outcomes, and even serve to distort reality. In particular, they fail to address the different meanings ascribed to the term ‘spirituality’ according to whether individuals endorse a “religious” or “non-religious” variety of spirituality. Consider for instance, the beliefs and practices associated with the New Age movement (and/or Human Potential movement). Proponents of New Age philosophy may attend workshops and seminars regularly or intermittently, or privately use meditative techniques, crystal therapy, or life management strategies following their reading of New Age publications and/or watching of videos and/or listening to audio tapes, without any face-to-face contact with supportive groups that validate the individual’s beliefs and/or practices. Bainbridge and Stark (1980) refer to the people engaging in these sorts of activities as client and audience cults. While client cults are seen to involve some degree of rudimentary organisation through the contact that takes place between New Age practitioners and their clientele, audience cults may involve little or no direct person to person contact between New Age authors and speakers and their readers/audiences (Bainbridge, 2004b). Depending on the nature, number, and temporality of measures used in survey instruments, people adhering to New Age beliefs may fail to endorse particular items that relate to “means or methods” (as described in Criterion C), even though they engage in a range of “means and methods” that have links to one or more identifiable groups. Ultimately, the efficacy of Hill’s and colleagues’ criteria for distinguishing religion from spirituality for research purposes will be dependent upon the range and number of items researchers use to gauge an individual’s correspondence or non-correspondence with them – with criterion A for determinations of spirituality, and either A and B, B and C, or A, B, and C for religiousness, as well as the particular operational definitions researchers adopt for the aspects covered by each criterion. Work conducted by Gall and colleagues (2005) suggests that progress is being made in developing cohesive theoretical frameworks for spirituality in regard to coping and health. Building upon transactional models proposed by Pargament (1997), Folkman (1997), and 61 Folkman and Greer (2000) for investigations into spirituality, coping and health, Gall and colleagues (2005) have devised a conceptual framework to elucidate the roles that key R/S influences might play in coping with stress. This model conceives a wide range of factors as being components of spirituality that are in a dynamic relationship with one another, and which mediate relationships between stressors and emotional, social, physical and spiritual wellbeing. These factors include: spiritual appraisals; personal factors such as denomination/doctrine, religious orientation, problem-solving styles, and hope; spiritual coping behaviours that are organisational, private, or non-traditional in nature; spiritual connections with nature, with others, or with the transcendent; and meaning-making according to life purpose, transformation or growth (Gall, Charbonneau, Clarke et al., 2005). However, the complexity of this framework and the range of constructs it involves raise substantial issues in relation to measurement of these constructs, particularly among large samples. To date, large studies that have investigated spirituality and coping have used a limited number of measures or have relied on single measures of religiousness or religiousness/spirituality. More recent research published by Saucier and Skrzypinska (2006) however, appears to have made substantial headway in progressing understanding of the distinctive aspects of religiousness and spirituality, as a means of addressing the conceptual overlap between these two terms. Saucier and Skrzypinska (2006:1259) defined religion as “a system of beliefs in a divine or superhuman power, and practices of worship and other rituals directed at such a power” (proposed by Argyle & Beit-Hallahmi, 1975:1) and subjective spirituality (SS) as “a subjective experience of the sacred” (Vaughan, 1991:105). Saucier and Skrzypinska (2006:1259) differentiate SS from religion in this way because they conceive SS as being “closer in meaning to the natural-language term mysticism” and “a narrower and less inclusive and ambiguous notion than spirituality”, and argue that “the term mystical is more distinct in meaning from religious than is the term spiritual”. The sample comprised 160 males and 215 females (with a mean age of around 51 years) from the Eugene-Springfield community sample. A one to nine rating scale was used to assess the extent that participants identified with being Religious in 1993, and a one to seven rating scale was used to assess whether participants were Mystical or Spiritual in 2002. A battery of instruments were administered, including 24 items from the Expressions of Spirituality Inventory (ESI) (MacDonald, 2002), the 48-item Survey of Dictionary-Based Isms (SDI) which measures social attitudes (Saucier, 2000), supplementary attitude scales (42 items), and various other instruments. Saucier’s and Skrzypinska’s research indicates that tradition-oriented religiousness (TR) and subjective 62 spirituality (SS) represent two independent dispositions, leading them to conclude that unitary concepts of religiousness/spirituality mask two divergent constructs. TR was observed to be highly associated with authoritarianism and traditionalism, and moderately correlated with collectivism (versus individualism), low levels of openness to experience, as well as reliance on tradition-hallowed sources of authority that provide shared practices like rituals, and rules for controlling social and sexual behaviour. By contrast, SS correlated strongly with fantasy- proneness, dissociative experiences, superstitious and magical beliefs, as well as eccentricity, and high levels of openness to experience. These findings led Saucier and Skrzypinska (2006:1288) to conclude that individual differences in R/S beliefs cannot be captured by a single dimension like religion/spirituality and that to date, psychology has paid too little attention to the two independent dispositions revealed by their research. This work in particular provides support for the approach being taken in this thesis, which differentiates between a traditional religious and a non-traditional approach to the divine. Summary The psychological theories discussed in this chapter have addressed the beneficial and harmful potential of both religion and spirituality. At an individual level, traditional religion is conceived to provide role models for social behaviour, while religion and spirituality are both seen to provide coping mechanisms by which to alleviate anxiety about death, as well as a range of mental health problems that might arise from stressful life circumstances. The possibility that religion and spirituality might act as negative influences on mental health and behaviour rests on their respective capacities to encourage religious intolerance, prejudice, negative self-perceptions, irrational thinking, self-denial, and to justify acts of violence and aggression. In combination, the discussion throughout Chapter Three suggests that existing theories about the role of religion and spirituality at an individual and at a societal level offer a basis from which numerous hypotheses can be devised and tested, in order to further understanding of the connections between religion/spirituality and mental health and social behaviour. Of particular interest in this thesis is the notion that the New Spirituality promotes a belief system in which a core belief is that the divine is spiritual and immanent in nature, as opposed to a traditional religious approach that views God as the divine being, and that these core beliefs imply divergent worldviews. The socio-historical context of these divergent conceptions of the divine suggests that the disparate worldviews each implies are not only relevant to individual wellbeing, but to the wellbeing of society. Whether or not these 63 contrasting conceptions of the divine are differentially related to mental health and social behaviour, and whether or not these associations are independent of involvement with religious organisations and religious background are the questions the current study seeks to address. Chapter Four reviews the extant literature related to religion, spirituality, mental health and social behaviour, and clearly shows that to date, this form of investigation has not been undertaken on a large community sample of young adults. 64 Chapter Four: Evidence of relationships between religion, spirituality, and mental health and social behaviour Since there is considerable overlap between religion and spirituality, it is necessary that the review of the empirical literature provided in this chapter encompasses research evidence related to each (or both) of these concepts. Currently, researchers are tending to frame their respective reviews of the literature as if previous studies have investigated religion, religiousness, and spirituality, regardless of the fact that their own research might only use single and traditional measures of religion. This approach has the potential to be confusing. The following discussion separates the available literature into two sections. The first section focuses on research evidence based on associations between measures of religion (or religiousness) and spirituality, and depression, anxiety, delusional ideation and social behaviour, while the second section is restricted to evidence based solely on measures of religion or religiousness, as well as measures of religious background and these same outcomes. Searches undertaken to locate the available empirical literature related to these topics were originally limited to all studies published from 1990 to the present. However, the paucity of literature related to some of these outcomes made it necessary in these instances to consider studies that date as far back as the 1950s and 1960s. From the literature related to religion and spirituality, it will be seen that a number of researchers appear to endorse the view that religion and spirituality cannot be separated operationally and have thus measured “religiousness/spirituality” as a unitary concept. Others however, have treated religion (or religiousness) and spirituality as separate entities, though there is little consistency in how these two concepts are operationalised. Since the scope of enquiry into the religion-mental health connection has only recently been extended to encompass the concept spirituality, there is limited empirical literature that pertains to religion (or religiousness) and spirituality, compared to that which is based on traditional measures of religion. The following review of the religion/spirituality literature gives particular attention to the manifold ways religion and spirituality are conceptualised across studies. Yet conceptual inconsistencies represent just one problem among numerous others within the study of religion/spirituality in general. Finding from three recent systematic reviews (Johnson, De Li, Larson et al., 2000; Rew & Wong, 2006; Wong, Rew, & Slaikeu, 2006) bring these problems into sharp focus. For example, Johnson et al. (2000) found that among the 40 studies they reviewed, half (20) failed to specify the reliability of measures used, 14 did not identify 65 response rates, and only five used prospective longitudinal data, limiting the credibility of causal inferences in the associations observed for 85 per cent of the studies examined. Of 43 studies reviewed by Rew and colleagues, the majority (26) either failed to specify or were unclear about the theoretical framework/conceptual model used. Wong et al. (2006) found that among the 20 studies they reviewed, only eight reported the religious affiliation/denomination of their samples, with most simply reporting that they were “Christians”. The following literature review gives detailed attention to the methodological approaches used in the literature related to religion/spirituality, and highlights the nature of controversies that continue to surround the study of religion and spirituality, and the implications these have for the findings related to these concepts. Section One: Research evidence pertaining to religiousness, spirituality, mental health, and social behaviour Religion, spirituality, and mental health Depression and anxiety Baetz and colleagues (2004) used Canadian population data from 70,844 people aged 15 years and older who responded to the Canadian National Population Health Survey (Wave II, 1996-1997) to examine the association between spiritual and religious involvement and depressive symptoms. Their findings warrant specific attention. Since a substantial proportion of the research that has investigated both religion and mental health has largely been based on clinical and convenient samples and has not measured both religion and spirituality, this particular study gives us some insight into the association between both spirituality and religion, and depression among a normal population sample, encompassing a wide age range, and different cultural and socioeconomic groups. Consistent with previous research, Baetz et al. (2004) found more frequent worship attendance to be significantly related to fewer symptoms of depression. However, those who agreed that spiritual values or faith were important or who perceived themselves to be “very” spiritual/religious, had higher levels of depressive symptoms, even after controlling for a range of potential and mediating factors including age, rural or urban location, income level, occupational prestige, educational status, general health, number of chronic health conditions, physical activity, alcohol consumption, marital status, and perceived social support. Baetz et al. (2004) offer several possible explanations for the observed association between religion/spirituality and higher levels of depressive symptoms. Firstly, they suggest that certain religious beliefs may foster depression, and secondly, that people who are not very spiritual/religious may turn to private 66 religion/spirituality for comfort. This interpretation seems to conflict with their finding that it was those who described themselves as being “very spiritual/religious” who had significantly more symptoms of depression, while the “moderately spiritual/religious l”, “not very spiritual/religious” showed no differences in symptoms of depression from those who were “not at all spiritual/religious”. Thirdly, they propose that socially desirable responding may make some people exaggerate or reduce reports of spirituality/religiousness and reports of depression, or fourthly, that depression may lead to less regular church attendance. However, they failed to identify the possibility that a small or large proportion of those who have adopted privatised forms of spirituality/religion have done so because they are disenchanted with organised religion. This may be a key reason for them not attending church. Those who describe themselves as being very spiritual/religious and who do not attend church, may be more depressed than others in the first instance, because they have a religious yearning that has been unable to be satisfied through involvement with mainstream religious institutions and organisations. This privatised form of spirituality/religiousness may exacerbate the tendency to be depressed through a lack of group membership that involves shared religious norms and values, and the absence of group solidarity and sense of belonging that this form of membership might provide. Even if those among the “very spiritual/religious” group are involved in group activities outside religious institutions, such as those associated with New Age and /or spiritual groups or organisations, the individualistic approach to spirituality that is characteristic of these groups and organisations makes it unlikely that such involvement provides individuals with norms, values, and beliefs that act as a cohesive and shared moral framework. Alternatively, it may be as Baetz et al. (Baetz, Griffin, Bowen et al., 2004:821) hypothesised, that certain beliefs “may foster depression”. While these authors did not elaborate on this point, given the large sample size used in this study, any belief system that could produce the observed effects must necessarily be widespread among the “very spiritual/religious” group. The use of a single measure of “being spiritual/religious” in this study precludes any determination being made as to whether the findings predominantly reflect the mental health of those who tend towards spirituality and not religiousness, or vice versa, or a mixture of both. The findings from this study provide no clue as to the causal sequence involved – whether the “very spiritual/religious” are already depressed and this leads them to adopt privatised forms of spirituality/religiousness, or whether privatised forms of spirituality/religiousness make the “very religious/spiritual” more vulnerable to depression. One Australian study, using a subset (N=989) of the 1998 Australian Community sample, investigated links between psychological wellbeing and Christian faith and practice. 67 Three measures were used to assess Christian faith and practice, including belief in God or some sort of spirit or life force, frequency of church attendance, and frequency of personal prayer. The belief item was measured according to a 4-point scale (“There is a personal God” =1, “There is some sort of spirit or life force” = 2; “I don’t really know what to think” = 3; “I don’t really think there is any sort of spirit, God, or life force” = 4) (Francis & Kaldor, 2002). Francis and Kaldor (2002) assessed psychological wellbeing according to participant responses to items from the Bradburn Balanced Affect Scale (BBAS) (Bradburn, 1969). The BBAS assesses wellbeing from three separate subscales, including the positive affect scale (assessing positive feelings in relation to: accomplishing something; things going your way; being particularly excited or interested in something; and feeling on top of the world), the negative affect scale (assessing negative feelings, including: feeling so restless that you couldn’t sit long in a chair; bored, depressed and very unhappy; very lonely or remote from other people; and upset because someone criticized you), and the balanced affect scale (difference in positive and negative feelings scores). Higher scores on the positive affect scale and lower scores on the negative affect scale represent greater levels of psychological wellbeing. The findings showed religiosity as having a positive association with wellbeing. Comparison of mean scores showed that females had significantly higher scores than males on the positive effect scale, but there were no gender differences for the negative or balanced effect scale. Older people recorded lower scores than young people on the two scales of positive and negative affect. Multiple regression analyses controlling for age and gender, showed that personal prayer, belief in God or some sort of spirit or life force, and church attendance were all positively associated with positive affect but that none of these variables were related to negative affect. In addition, once personal prayer and belief in God/some sort of spirit or life force were taken into account, church attendance gave no additional predictive power for wellbeing. Hence, even though numerous studies have found church attendance to have a “beneficial effect” on mental health, it might be that R/S beliefs and private practices account for this relationship rather than church attendance, in cases where church attendance, R/S beliefs, and/or other practices were not measured or included in analyses. Unfortunately, the use of correlations and multiple regression analyses in this particular study means that belief in some sort of spirit or life force (endorsed by 40%) was treated as a higher level of “belief in God” (endorsed by 39%). The results therefore give little insight about the extent that these two different beliefs might be differentially related to psychological wellbeing. Data from a more recent survey, the 2002-03 Wellbeing and Security Study, gathered from a random sample of 1,514 Australians has led to a more comprehensive picture of the different 68 forms of religiosity that now exist within Australia. A research paper entitled Spirituality and Wellbeing in Australia by Kaldor and colleagues (2004) investigated four distinct aspects of spirituality among Australians including Christian religiosity, a general spiritual orientation, secular orientation, and alternative spiritualities. Table 1 below identifies the nature of the constructs that formed the basis for devising scales that were used to measure these four different dimensions of spirituality. 69 Table 1: Dimensions of spirituality investigated by the Australian 2002-03 Wellbeing and Security Study Type of spirituality Constructs Measures Christian religiosity Orthodoxy of religious belief Items affirming Jesus’ divinity and resurrection, and salience of belief Unreflective religiosity Items affirming it is wrong to question the authority of the church or the Bible and that we should not question and just believe Religious practices Frequency of public practices including church attendance and private practices such as prayer, reading the Bible, and reading Christian literature General spiritual Belief that there is something beyond orientation this life that makes sense of it all, and self-perception of being spiritual Secular orientation Belief that there is no room for God or the supernatural in explaining life (the universe has no meaning, science explains everything, and life makes sense in terms of the here and now) Alternative spiritualities Spiritual journeying Ongoing change in beliefs and practices, and items affirming the potential value of all spiritualities in this journey Spiritual connection with Items affirming awareness of a life nature or the land force in the forests, oceans, and ecosystems, and a sense of belonging to the land Buddhist or New Age None identified influences Openness to alternative Openness to Reiki, Reichian therapy, healing practices and Chakra balancing Engaging with alternative Active seeking of understanding of spiritualities alternative spirituality such as attendance at the annual Mind Body Healing Festival Having psychic or ‘beyond Items measuring the seeking of death’ experiences direction from tarot, horoscopes, or communication with the dead, experiencing ghosts, astral travel, witchcraft, and prediction of the future Source: Kaldor et al. (2004:8-9) While Kaldor and colleagues (2004) did not examine specific domains of mental health, they did investigate whether different forms of spirituality were differentially related to a summary measure of overall mental health. Overall, there appeared to be no clear relationships between any of the types of spirituality under study and mental health, with the 70 authors speculating that this might be due to the inability of their chosen measure from the SF12 (Ware, Kosinski, & Keller, 1996) to adequately capture differences in mental health. However, differences in other domains of wellbeing and behaviour were observed and these warrant some discussion since few studies have investigated differential outcomes according to varying forms of spirituality. Those with a spiritual orientation were found to have a much greater sense of purpose in life and optimism, particularly in regard to satisfaction with achievements in life and place in the community, and were also more likely to contribute to others in daily life, by giving money to charities or by doing voluntary service with community groups, than those with a secular outlook (Kaldor, Hughes, Castle et al., 2004:10). Those with orthodox religious beliefs (especially those who engaged in religious practices) were found to be more likely to contribute to others than those assigned to the unreflective religiosity group. Alternative spiritualities were observed to be positively correlated with optimism, sense of purpose in life, informal help for others, but not with giving to charities (Kaldor, Hughes, Castle et al., 2004:14). They were also more likely than those with a religious orientation, to feel that they have higher levels of control in their lives. Buddhist/New Age and psychic involvement were found to be negatively correlated with satisfaction with life, with small negative correlations also being found between both of these types of involvement and sense of security (Kaldor, Hughes, Castle et al., 2004:14). A recent review of the literature related to religion/spirituality and adolescent health outcomes conducted by Cotton et al. (2006) indicates that the bulk of research that addresses adolescent mental health tends to focus on outcomes such as health-related behaviours like substance use and sexual activity, and the use of religion as a coping resource. However, they identified one study that examined anxiety as an outcome and another two that investigated symptoms of depression, all of which use some measure of spirituality. Davis et al. (2003) found that among 14 to 17 year olds (N=45), spiritual wellbeing, as defined by one’s sense of wellbeing in relation to God and one’s sense of life purpose and life satisfaction, predicted lower trait anxiety. Being “spiritual/religious” and having had positive interpersonal religious experiences were observed by Pearce et al. (2003) to be associated with lower levels of depressive symptoms among young adolescents (N=744). Wright et al. (1993) found that making meaning out of life using R/S beliefs and seeking spiritual support were also related to fewer symptoms of depression among 9th to 12th graders (N=451). Religiousness, spirituality and mental health among the mentally or physically ill The bulk of evidence arising from investigations into both religiousness and spirituality comes from studies using samples of people who are experiencing mental or physical illness. 71 One recent study investigated whether there were any differences in psychological wellbeing and recovery among people with a serious mental illness including schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, or major depressive disorder, and a significant functional disability as a consequence of mental illness (N=1,824). Participants were categorised as religious (those participating in a community of people who gather around common ways of worshipping) or spiritual (those who see themselves as part of a larger spiritual force) (Corrigan, McCorkle, Schell et al., 2003). Analyses using MANOVAs and chi-square tests revealed that people who self-identified with spirituality had better outcomes related to recovery, subjective and objective measures of social inclusion, hope and empowerment, but no difference was observed for quality of life between those self-identifying as spiritual compared to those who did not. People who identified themselves as religious had significantly lower anxiety, depression, and total scores on the short version (25 items) of the Hopkins Symptom Checklist (Deratogis & et al, 1974), and lower levels of disability as measured by the Services Outcome Section of the Mental Health Statistical Improvement Program (MHSIP) Consumer Survey (Eisen, Shaul, Leff, Stringfellow, Clarridge, & Cleary, 2001). By comparison, spirituality was associated with significantly less self-reported symptoms of depression and disability. No relationship was found between either religiousness or spirituality and reports of being bothered by problems related to alcohol or drug use. Nor were any interactions observed between religiousness and spirituality for any of the outcomes under study. The differences found between the “religious” and “spirituality” groups for various outcomes in Corrigan et al.’s (2003) research warrant specific attention, particularly given that research into religiousness versus spirituality is limited. Firstly, this particular research shows spirituality as being connected with higher levels of both subjective and objective measures of social inclusion, while religiousness is related to subjective social inclusion only. Contrary to the notion that religious membership affords the individual tangible forms of social support, shared norms and values, and a greater density of social networks, the findings from this study suggest that spirituality involves higher levels of social inclusion according to objective measures than religiousness. These findings suggest that those aligned with ‘spirituality’ have social networks beyond those that are assessable from measures like church attendance. Secondly, self-empowerment is central to the ideologies associated with the New Age, feminist spirituality and other groups who see spirituality as a central tenet of their belief systems. Thus, the finding that those categorised as ‘spiritual’ had higher levels of self-rated empowerment is especially interesting. It would seem from this result that those subscribing to a spiritual worldview do have a greater sense of personal empowerment than religious people 72 or those who deemed to have no religion. It is impossible to tell however, whether this group has actually achieved greater charge over their own lives, or whether they simply believe that they have done so because the notion of self-empowerment figures so strongly within their particular framework of belief. Thirdly, both religiousness and spirituality were found to be associated with fewer symptoms of depression. However, no benefit appears to be derived from spirituality as assessed from anxiety and total symptoms scores. Only religiousness was associated with these particular outcomes. More studies are needed that compare mental health outcomes among the ‘religious’ and the ‘spiritual’ to determine whether there are persistent differences that might be linked to these contrasting forms of religiosity, particularly among normal populations. Finally, Corrigan et al.‘s (2003) original hypothesis was that spirituality would have more beneficial effects than religiousness, and these researchers reported their surprise that this hypothesis was not supported by their results. This suggests that they held some pre-existing notion that spirituality is somehow “better” than religiousness, lending support to the view that researchers are likely to approach the study of religion and spirituality with preconceived ideas about whether spirituality is “good” and religiousness is “bad” or vice versa, despite there being little empirical evidence on which to base these notions. A more recent study by Wink, Dillon, and Larsen (2005) sought to test the hypothesis that religiousness acts as a buffer against depression in the presence of poor physical health in late adulthood. They also sought to investigate whether spirituality plays a similar role to religiousness in buffering against depression among those with poor physical health. The study sample comprised men and women (N W 156) born in the San Francisco area in the early and late 1920s, who were followed up in middle adulthood (during their 40s – in 1970), in late middle adulthood (during their 50s/early 60s – in 1982), and in late adulthood (their late 60s/mid-70s – 1997 to 2000). The concept religiousness was operationalised by Wink and colleagues (2005) as the importance of institutionalised beliefs and practices (belief in God, belief in an after-life, and prayer, and/or attendance at a traditional place of worship). Spirituality was operationalised as the importance of noninstitutionalised beliefs and practices (emphasis on awareness of sacred connectedness with God, a higher power, or nature, and engagement in intentional spiritual practices such as meditation, Shamanistic journeying, centering, or contemplative prayer on a regular basis). Religiousness and spirituality were coded separately on a five-point scale independently by two raters, using responses to open- ended questions about religion from transcripts of interviews at each time point. Those who 73 scored 16 or higher on the Center for Epidemiologic Scale-Depression Scale (CES-D) (Radloff, 1977) were categorised as depressed. Concurrent religiousness in late adulthood (in 1997 to 2000), and religiousness in early adulthood (in 1970) were each found to have a buffering effect on depression associated with poor physical health in late adulthood, while religiousness in late middle adulthood (in 1982) was observed to be unrelated to this outcome. By contrast, spirituality (assessed in late middle adulthood and late adulthood only) appeared to have no buffering effect on depression among those with poor physical health (Wink, Dillon, & Larsen, 2005). Other studies that have combined spirituality and religion into a singular concept, in order to investigate their connection to coping with mental illness, support the view that spirituality/religion is beneficial in relation to depression. Around 80 per cent of 400 patients in the county of Los Angeles were found to use some type of religious belief or activity to cope with their symptoms or daily difficulties, and 65 per cent of this sample reported that religion helped them to a large or moderate extent in coping with symptom severity, 48 per cent agreed that spirituality/religion became more important to them when symptoms worsened, and 30 per cent stated that religious beliefs or activities were the most important thing that kept them going (Tepper, Rogers, Coleman, & Maloney, 2001). Other research indicates that religion/spirituality is associated with quicker recovery from mental illness and lower levels of current depression. Among 88 Canadian psychiatric inpatients (50% male) with a diagnosis of major depressive order (67%), or depression co-morbid with another Axis I disorder, such as panic disorder, eating disorder, or substance abuse (33%), or Axis II personality disorder or traits (49%), levels of spiritual/religious beliefs were observed to be quite similar or slightly higher than those of the Canadian general population (Baetz, Larson, Marcoux et al., 2002). Frequent church attendance was found to be associated with lower scores on the Beck Depression Inventory, significantly greater subjective satisfaction with life, and shorter current hospital stays. Intrinsic religiousness was observed to be linked to lower depression scores. Those patients reporting a religious response as their most important coping factor had shorter hospital stays. In considering specific religious beliefs, the three different beliefs measured (“in a personal God who rewards and punishes”; in the need to be born again”, and, “in every part of the Bible as the actual word of God”) were observed to be unrelated to any of the mental health outcomes being examined. However, all three beliefs under examination are associated with forms of religiosity that are religiously traditional in nature, and it is therefore impossible to gauge whether different results might have emerged had non-traditional beliefs been considered. 74 Three other studies indicate that R/S faith may assist the elderly in coping with illness, thereby reducing depression. Among 850 male patients, the use of spiritual/religious faith as a coping strategy has been found to be associated with lower levels of depression at the time of hospital admission (Koenig, Cohen, Blazer et al., 1992). Using a sub-sample of 201 of these same patients who had depression, as well as medical illness at the time of admission, greater levels of R/S coping were also found to predict lower depression scores at follow-up six months later, with the clinical effects of R/S coping being observed to be strongest for those with the severest levels of disability (Koenig, Cohen, Blazer, Kudler, Krishnan, & Sibert, 1995). Among younger age groups too, religious coping has been found to assist oncology patients aged between 10 and 23 years in understanding and accepting their condition (Tebbi, Mallon, Richards, & Bigler, 1987). While the accumulated evidence tends to suggest that religion and spirituality may be important coping resources for those who are mentally or physically ill, it remains unclear whether these benefits extend to healthy populations. Religion, spirituality and delusional ideation Delusions are defined in the DSM-IV- TR as “erroneous beliefs that usually involve a misinterpretation of perceptions or experiences” (American Psychiatric Association, 2000). Since delusions represent one feature of the symptomatology associated with schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders, they have long been of interest within the field of psychiatry. However, the extent that delusional thoughts are an indication of psychosis or psychotic tendencies remains a contentious issue. In a recent debate published in the British Journal of Psychiatry, Delespaul and Van Os (see Jones, Delespaul, & Van Os, 2003:286) argued that many people in the general population express beliefs “that resemble the delusions of patients with a diagnosis of psychotic disorder”, and “to the extent that psychotic-like beliefs are prevalent in the non-patient population, they can be labelled as normal”. They further argued that the empirical evidence suggests that delusions should be thought of as “a multidimensional characteristic” which varies along various dimensions including conviction, distress, conviction and “bizarreness” and that one or several of these dimensions may occur over time within the same person (Jones, Delespaul, & Van Os, 2003:286). According to this view, delusions do not necessarily indicate mental illness. Rather, symptoms of schizophrenia are seen to be at the extreme end of a continuum ranging from healthy functioning, through eccentricity, to florid psychosis” (Peters, Day, McKenna et al., 1999:83). However, Jones (2003:285) takes a different view, and in agreement with Jaspers (1963), sees delusional beliefs 75 as being distinct from normal beliefs because they involve a transformation in the awareness of meaning, with the associated belief becoming fixated and impervious to counterargument, leading to an alteration of the personality. In line with the argument mounted by Delespaul, and van Os (Jones, Delespaul, & Van Os, 2003), Peters and colleagues (1999:92) argue that the process of becoming overtly deluded is determined by the extent to which delusions are believed, the degree that they interfere with one’s life, as well as their emotional impact. Thus, it is not simply the presence or content of delusional thoughts that differentiates psychosis from normalcy (Peters, Joseph, & Garety, 1999). According to this view, high levels of delusional thinking within normal populations may represent little more than individual or group idiosyncrasy – a consequence of individual differences and numerous cultural influences (see Peters, Joseph, & Garety, 1999). The power of the social in determining the content of delusional thinking has been highlighted by research conducted by Stompe and colleagues (1999). During the past ten years, technological innovations like computer games and the internet have been observed to have registered in the content of schizophrenic delusions (Stompe, Ortwein-Swoboda, Ritter, & Schanda, 2003:6). This has led many authors to conclude that zeitgeist (the German expression for the “spirit of the time”, that is, the intellectual and cultural climate of a given era) is “creating new delusional contents” (Stompe, Ortwein-Swoboda, Ritter et al., 2003:6). Stompe and colleagues (2003) sought to test this hypothesis by comparing data gathered on two Austrian cohorts of patients with schizophrenic delusions from 1856-1910 and 1911-1955 with their own data from 1992-2001. Findings showed that delusions of persecution by human beings have not changed significantly over time and remain the most common delusional theme, but that persecution by supernatural beings decreased from 25.9 to 13.1 per cent between 1856/1910 and 1911/1955 and then increased until 2001 to 19.8 per cent. Grandiose delusions, the second most common type of delusion, remained fairly stable across time, rates of delusions of supernatural guilt hardly changed, and delusions of earthly guilt decreased from 1955 until 2001 from 19.7 to 8.3 per cent. Stompe et al. (2003:10) highlight that the fluctuation in persecution by supernatural beings may reflect the long-term cycles of secularization and re-evangelization over the past 100 years. Furthermore, they note that the ability of NRMs to reach many people (particularly the young) during the extensive changes to religious traditions that took place between 1975 and 1990 (Kepel, 1991) is evidenced by the link they found in their 1992-2001 data (Stompe, Friedmann, Ortwein et al., 1999) between the attraction of religion for young people and the return of “irrealistic” delusional themes, including supernatural persecution, grandiosity and guilt (Stompe, Ortwein-Swoboda, Ritter et 76 al., 2003:10). The influence of zeitgeist observed among patient populations is also evident among the general population as indicated by the widespread prevalence of paranormal and New Age beliefs identified in Chapter Two. The degree of “bizarreness” of a particular delusional belief is largely determined by cultural norms, with similar mental and behavioural states being classified as religious experiences in some cultural settings, and as psychiatric disorders in others (Bhugra, 1996; Peters, Day, McKenna et al., 1999). Nevertheless, there is some evidence to support the view that delusional ideation is a marker for subsequent mental health impairment. This evidence warns of the possibility that the regard of delusions as being “normal” when there is no associated preoccupation with, conviction about, or distress from these delusions, may lead to a failure in detection of early signs of the development of mental and/or emotional problems. Longitudinal research conducted in New Zealand suggests that delusional ideation at one point in time, regardless of content, is a strong predictor of subsequent psychosis. Poulton and colleagues (2000) investigated the relationship between delusional ideation in pre- adolescence and risk for schizophreniform disorder in adulthood. Eleven year olds endorsing just one delusional item were found to be 5.5 times, and those endorsing two or more of these items to be 16.4 times, more likely to be diagnosed with schizophreniform disorder at 26 years than those who did not endorse any of the five items at 11 years of age (Poulton, Caspi, Moffitt et al., 2000). Delusional ideation measures used in this study included the belief that people “could read your mind”, in having been sent messages through television or radio, in having had people “follow or spy” on them, in having “heard voices other people couldn’t hear”, and belief that “something had gotten inside your body or your body has changed in some strange way”. Other research suggests that high levels of delusional ideation may also be a predictor for subsequent depression. Verdoux and colleagues (1999) administered the 21-item Peters Delusional Inventory (PDI) to 425 primary care patients aged 18 to 93 years with no history of mood disorders (Time 1), with a follow-up being undertaken 12 months later (Time 2). Patients with total PDI scores above the 90th percentile at Time 1 were found to have a nine- fold risk for depression at Time 2, compared to patients with scores below the 10th percentile. In combination, the studies mentioned above (Poulton, Caspi, Moffitt et al., 2000; Verdoux, van Os, Maurice-Tison et al., 1999) raise concerns that delusional ideation may be a precursor to mental health problems, and that younger generations may be prone towards 77 particular forms of delusional ideation because of their attraction to NRMs (Kepel, 1991; Stompe, Friedmann, Ortwein et al., 1999). There is currently little empirical literature related to both religion and spirituality, and measures of delusional ideation and thus only three studies are reviewed in this section of the literature review. However, other studies have examined the relationship between religion and delusional ideation and these are examined in Section Two of this chapter. The available literature on this area of enquiry discussed in this chapter identifies that little research attention has been directed towards delusional ideation among younger generations specifically, and that there has been a lack of research attention to the relationship between traditional and non-traditional conceptions of the divine and delusional ideation. Two of the three available studies that examine connections between religion/spirituality and delusions, were undertaken in the past two years and give some insight into the relationships observed between in delusional between a traditional religious orientation and a “spiritual” orientation, with the third study undertaken in the 1990s, investigating differences in delusional ideation between NRM members, Christians, those with no religious affiliation, and psychotic inpatients. The most recent study by Saucier and Skrzypinska (2006) found that delusional ideation differs substantially according to whether religiosity is tradition-oriented (TR) or leans more towards subjective spirituality (SS). SS was found to be significantly correlated with: dissociative experiences, measured according to the 31-item revised Curious Experiences Scale (Goldberg, in press); fantasy-proneness in childhood, assessed from seven items contained in the Creative Experiences Questionnaire (Merkelbach, Horselenberg, & Muris, 2001); and irrational beliefs and magical ideation, measured according to a 19-item scale devised by Koopmans and colleagues (1994) (measuring beliefs in psychokinesis, out-of-body experiences, astrology, reincarnation, spells, and psychic powers). No significant correlations were found between TR and these same outcomes. The elevated levels of irrational beliefs and magical ideation found among the SS group clearly rest on the tendency of this group towards mysticism, that is, this group could be expected to have higher delusional ideation scores because the instruments used directly tap beliefs and ideas that are themselves associated with mysticism. Yet the higher levels of fantasy-proneness and dissociative experiences among the SS group suggest that this group have different characteristics to those who hold traditional religious beliefs that extend beyond the domain of beliefs. An earlier study by Stifler and colleagues (2005) investigated differences in mystic beliefs 78 and experiences, egotism, and narcissism between members of various spiritual groups, psychotics, and normals, by comparing the scores of these three groups on a battery of items, including the Hood Mysticism Scale (Hood, 1975), the Ego Grasping Orientation Inventory (Knoblauch, 1985), and the Narcissistic Personality Inventory (Raskin & Hall, 1979). A sample of 30 normals (hospital staff), 30 psychiatric inpatients meeting clinical criteria for psychosis and 30 members of contemplative/spiritual groups (including those affiliated with Buddhism, Hindu-Yoga, Universalism, Taosim, and other affiliations) was used for this research. Normal subjects reported substantially fewer mystical experiences, (mean = 124) than either the contemplative group (mean = 142) or the psychotic inpatient group (mean = 141). The contemplative group was thus differentiated from the normal group in terms of mystical experiences, but not the inpatient group. Ego Grasping scores were much higher among the inpatient group than both the normal and contemplative groups (P < 0.001), as were their narcissism scores. Interestingly however, the contemplative group had higher narcissism scores than the normal group, leading the authors to question whether those with a greater degree of narcissism are more prone to the pursuit of a mystical path. An alternative explanation is that mystical beliefs encourage narcissism. Peters et al. (1999) compared levels of delusional ideation across four different groups: members of new religious movements (NRMs); Christians; those with no religious affiliation; and psychotic in-patients. NRM members (comprising Druids and Hare Krishnas) were found to have significantly higher scores on measures of delusional ideation and depression than both the Christian group and the non-affiliated group. The higher levels of depression among the NRM members were found to be attributable to Druids, and not Hare Krishna members. NRM members were found to have similar delusional ideation scores to the psychotic in- patient group, though NRM groups were differentiated from inpatients with psychosis in that inpatients had significantly higher levels of stress and were much more preoccupied by these thoughts than NRM members. Peters et al. (1999) called for more research in this area, particularly longitudinal research, so that it can be determined whether the delusional thoughts experienced by NRM members precede or follow their NRM membership. Together, the Stifler et al. (2005) and Saucier and Skrzypinska (2006) studies raise the question as to whether the connection between forms of religiosity that are contemplative or mystic in orientation and higher levels of delusional ideation simply reflects the types of measures used to capture delusional ideation, since these directly tap mystically oriented beliefs. However, the findings from Saucier’s and Skrzypinska’s (2006) investigation suggest that those whose religiosity tends towards spirituality and not religiousness are more likely to 79 have dissociative experiences and to have fantasies in childhood than those whose religiosity is more traditional in orientation. It thus appears that those whose religiosity leans towards mysticism not only have idiosyncratic beliefs, but that they also have experiences that conform to these beliefs. What remains unclear is whether idiosyncratic beliefs precede dissociative experiences, or vice versa. The strong correlation with fantasy proneness in childhood found for this group by Saucier and Skrzypinska (2006) suggests that the tendency towards mystic beliefs and dissociative experiences might be related to factors like personality. However, it is equally plausible that the social environments in which the mystically-inclined are raised somehow foster childhood fantasies, which in turn, give rise to both and mystic beliefs and dissociative experiences. In considering the studies by Peters et al. and Stifler and colleagues, it is clear that members of NRMs and contemplative/spiritual groups have similar levels of delusional ideation and mystical experiences to those experienced by psychiatric inpatients. However, these groups are differentiated from psychiatric inpatients in that these beliefs and experiences do not appear to be associated with mental health impairment. This is one of the factors that supports the view that delusional ideation lies on a continuum from normality to psychosis, and that it is not the content of delusions but the way these impede daily functioning that determines their link to psychotic behaviour (Peters, Joseph, & Garety, 1999). Yet it is noteworthy that Druids were found to have elevated depression scores compared to control groups (Christians and those unaffiliated with any religion) (Peters, Day, McKenna et al., 1999) and that members of contemplative/spiritual groups had higher narcissism scores than controls. Peters et al. (1999:92) argue that their research supports the notion that members of NRMs fall somewhere in between normality and psychosis, where “normal” individuals (including the religious and non-religious) are at one extreme and deluded individuals are at the other extreme. They also speculate that membership to groups that match an individual’s idiosyncratic beliefs may afford an avenue of social support that assists them to function normally within society. However, it remains unclear whether members of NRMs and contemplative/spiritual groups might be at greater risk for subsequent mental illness than those who have a traditional religious or secular orientation. Since most of the empirical evidence identifying relationships between religion, spirituality, and delusional ideation is based on cross-sectional data, it is also unclear whether higher levels of delusional ideation and mystical experiences among members of NRMs and contemplative spiritual groups pre-exist or follow their involvement with these particular groups. The possible bi-directional relationship between religion and delusional ideation parallels that identified by Introvigne 80 (2002) in relation to explanations proposed for the bizarre beliefs and behaviour of cult members observed in the cult wars – where idiosyncratic beliefs are conceived to represent either the matching psychopathologies of both cult leaders and their followers, or that they are a consequence of brainwashing by cult leaders and/or fellow group members. Religion, spirituality and social behaviour Investigations into connections between religion and the social behaviour of younger generations commonly focus on antisocial behaviour, with either aggressive and/or delinquent behaviours forming the main outcome/s of interest. Only two studies appear to have investigated links between religiousness/spirituality, and antisocial behaviour. One study by Resnick et al. (1993) found that among 7th to 12th graders (N=36,254), self-identification as being a religious or spiritual person was associated with lower levels of quietly disturbed behaviours among girls, and acting-out behaviours among boys. A more recent study by Good and Willougby (2006) sought to investigate whether indicators of religiosity (measured by church attendance) and spirituality (measured by belief in God or a higher power) were linked to differences in direct and indirect forms of aggression (pushing and shoving someone, and spreading rumours and untrue stories) and minor and major delinquency (shoplifting and joining a gang), among a sample of 6,578 Canadian adolescents aged 13 to 18 years. The sample used for analysis (n=4445) was divided into four groups based on spirituality (“yes” or “no”) and weekly or more attendance at church during the past month (“yes” or “never attends church”). Those respondents who were unsure whether they believed in God or a higher power, as well as those who attended church less than once a week, were discarded from analyses. Findings showed that those who attended church regularly had significantly lower mean scores for direct aggression and minor delinquency (P = <.003) than those who never attend church, regardless of whether or not they believed in God or a higher power. No significant differences in mean scores were evident between groups for indirect aggression or major delinquency. These findings tend to support the view that regular church attendance is associated with lower levels of physical aggression and theft, and that there is no relationship between R/S beliefs and antisocial behaviour. However, the collapsing of believe in God and belief in a higher power into a single category means that any differences in behaviour that might be linked to these different systems of belief remain undetectable. Similarly, the approach used in the Resnick et al. (1993) study, whereby self-identification with “being religious or spiritual” was treated as a unitary concept, removes any opportunity to examine whether adolescents who identify with “being religious” and those who identify with “being spiritual” behave in similar or disparate ways. 81 Measures of prosociality also provide a means to examine the connection between religiosity and social behaviour, and while prosociality is not a focus of this thesis, evidence from one recent study (Saroglou, Pichon, Trompette, Verschueren, & Dernelle, 2005) is being included in this section, since it provides some insight into differences in prosociality between the religiously and spiritually inclined. Evidence to date seems to support the view that religious people tend to be more prosocial and helpful than the non-religious. However, it is argued that this association may be more a reflection of religious people’s self-delusion and “moral hypocrisy”, than it is an indication of true differences between the religious and non- religious, since this research has relied heavily on self-report data (Saraglou et al. 2005). Nevertheless, the bulk of evidence indicates that the prosocial character of religious people remains stable across different cohorts, cultures, and religions, but that observed effects are modest (Saraglou et al. 2005). Saraglou et al. (2005) sought to examine whether the prosociality of religious people might be the result of biased self-perceptions among the religious by comparing self-report with ratings of pro-sociality provided by a friend and colleague of individuals within the study population. They also examined whether there were any differences between three particular forms of religiosity, including spirituality. A total of 250 Belgian adults were approached to participate. Around one-third of the participants were pastoral workers and the remainder of the sample were acquaintances of the researchers who were perceived to be “not specifically religious”. Participants were given three envelopes, one for themselves, one for a friend, and the other for a colleague of their choice. The sample was divided into three groups: religiosity referring to those who see both God and religion as being important to them, and who also engage in prayer; emotional religion referring to those whose religiosity gives emphasis to the meaning and experience religion provides; and, spirituality, designated as those who regard spirituality as being the most important aspect of religion. Self-reported prosociality was significantly correlated with: religiosity for altruism (0.27, p = < 0.01), empathy (0.27, p = < 0.01), and honesty (0.24, p = < 0.01); with emotional religion for altruism (0.31, p < 0.001) and empathy (0.26, p = < 0.01); and with spirituality for altruism (0.29, p = < 0.001) and perspective taking (a sub-dimension of empathy) (0.28, p = < 0.01). However, friends’ ratings of prosociality were not correlated with any of three groups under study for any of the domains of pro-sociality, indicating possible self-report bias for all three groups. Colleague ratings of prosociality for the religiosity group were significant for altruism (partial correlation coefficient = 0.19; p = <.05), empathy (partial correlation coefficient = 0.22; p = <.05), and honesty (partial correlation coefficient = 0.20; p = <.05). The greater strength of the partial 82 correlations between religiosity and altruism, empathy, and honesty observed for self-report compared to the modest and weak correlations found for colleague ratings suggest that the religiosity group may tend to exaggerate their own levels of prosociality to a small degree. However, since one-third of the sample was pastoral workers, even the agreement found between self-report and colleague ratings for the religiosity group is open to question. Greater agreement between these two groups may reflect a biased view on the part of colleagues. These colleagues are also likely to be engaged in pastoral work and may view a prosocial attitude as being fundamental to their profession. They may be prone therefore to over-report their colleagues’ levels of prosociality. Alternatively, it may be that the religiosity group behave differently at work than they do when in the company of friends, thereby explaining the disagreement in colleague and friend ratings. The fact that neither friends nor colleagues ratings of prosociality were correlated with any of the domains under investigation for either the emotional religion and spirituality groups suggest that those within these groups are even more biased in their assessments of themselves than the religiosity group. However, one needs to exercise caution in interpreting these findings. While the authors of this paper concluded that their findings suggest that bias alone does not explain the association between being religious and prosociality, one curious aspect of this research is the absence of a “no religion” group. Thus, it would seem that all those recruited in this study within the category “not specifically religious” led to the exclusion of any non-religious/non-spiritual participants. No conclusions can be made therefore as to the extent that self-perceived and others ratings of prosociality differ between the religious, emotion religion, and spirituality groups, and those who have no inclination towards either religiousness or spirituality. Summary of evidence related to religion and spirituality Apart from differences in irrational beliefs, magical ideation, fantasy-proneness, and dissociative experiences, little is known about the mental health of those whose form of religiosity is traditional in nature compared to those whose form of religiosity is non- traditional and contemplative/mystic in orientation. While Roof (1993) found that those who describe themselves as being “spiritual, but not religious” are more likely to have had mystical experiences, to hold non-traditional New Age beliefs, and to be independent of others than those who describe themselves as being “spiritual and religious”, there is an absence of research that has directly investigated whether non-traditional R/S beliefs have a positive, negative, or null relationship with domains of mental health and social behaviour like depression, anxiety, aggression, and delinquency. Given the evidence that substantial proportions of populations within Australia, the United States, the Netherlands, and other 83 countries now endorse a non-traditional conception of the divine (belief in a spiritual or higher power or force), research is needed that can assess whether those who are part of the shift away from a belief in God have similar, better, or worse mental health and behavioural outcomes than those who continue to embrace traditional R/S beliefs. To date, it appears that unitary measures of being R/S are positively associated with recovery from, and coping with, mental or physical illness. The longitudinal nature of the study by Koenig et al. (1995) provides support for the view that the use of religious/spiritual faith has beneficial effects for those who are coping with illness by helping to reduce levels of depression. However, it remains unclear whether or not these beneficial effects extend to the population more generally or are restricted to those experiencing ill health. The study by Koenig et al. (1995) was based on elderly males with illness, and the body of research into religious coping more generally relies heavily on older samples. Thus, it is unclear if religiousness and spirituality are important predictors of mental health for younger healthy samples. Findings from the Baetz (2004) population study of depression among Canadians suggest that participation in religious activities protects against depression while strong self- identification with spirituality/religiousness appears to place people at risk for symptoms of depression. It may be that the use of single measures for spirituality/religiousness masks a differential effect for those who perceive themselves to be religious and/or spiritual and also participate in the activities of religious organisations, those who perceive themselves as being religious but do not attend church, and those who perceive themselves as being spiritual but not religious because of their rejection of, or resistance to, organised religion and its doctrines. It is also difficult to know whether there are links between religiousness, spirituality, and social behaviour, since this area has received little research attention. The evidence related to prosociality cited earlier only gives an indication of perceived prosociality or the lack thereof, according to self and others’ ratings, and does not directly measure an individual’s actual behaviour. However, it seems that those who place an emphasis on spirituality might have over-inflated perceptions of how prosocial they are, raising questions about the nature of their actual behaviour when interacting with others. Overall, the extant literature on religion, religiousness, and spirituality alerts one to the salience of Pargament’s (1999) warning that current approaches to the study of spirituality lack grounding in either theory or research. The notion that religion/spirituality acts as a coping resource and thus serves to improve health outcomes stands out as perhaps the most coherent 84 theoretical argument proposed thus far, with a growing body of empirical literature lending support to its central hypothesis. Yet it remains that the beneficial effects observed from religiousness and spirituality might be confined to situations involving extreme personal stress such as terminal illness or disability. It cannot be assumed that these same benefits extend to the circumstances of normal, day-to-day living. Moreover, the recent reification of the concept of religion into religiousness and spirituality (see for example literature reviews by Larson & Larson, 2003; McCullough & Larson, 1999) serves to exacerbate the methodological complexities associated with the study of religion in general. As a consequence, criticisms levelled at the scientific study of religion like that made by Wilfred Cantwell Smith (1991:12), that the concept religion is an “unintelligible entity” and is therefore “not a valid object of enquiry”, are likely to appear more and more justifiable unless researchers clearly delineate the conceptual and theoretical basis for their research. Beyer (2003) points to the need for researchers to severely circumscribe their research, giving due consideration to its socio-historical context, in order to counter arguments that religion is “fundamentally misleading as a scientific concept” (Beyer, 2003:141). Indeed, Jonathan Z. Smith (1982:xi) argued more than two decades ago that religion is “solely the creation of the scholar’s study” and has “no independent existence apart from the academy”. Certainly, the meanings ascribed to the words “religion” and “spirituality” must necessarily reflect the socio-cultural and historical contexts in which these terms are used. If these contexts are ignored, the meanings ascribed to these terms by members of the general population may bear little resemblance to those ascribed to them by the academic community. Beyer (2003) argues that scientific, theological, and official meanings ascribed to the concept of religion need to be differentiated from one another, since many of the controversies about how religion is conceptualised are fuelled by disparate notions of what “counts” as religion. He further argues that the study of religion needs to be reoriented, such that there is a “theoretically grounded repartition of approaches to the concept of religion”, in order to avoid the contestations that surround this concept (Beyer, 2003:143). The current tendency for researchers to report findings as being related to “religion” and “spirituality” tends to be misleading, given that there is little consensus on the meaning of these terms. The myriad ways in which these concepts are being defined and measured require that researchers clearly detail the specific dimensions of religion or spirituality that are being investigated and that their respective interpretations of findings reflect the limited nature of measures used. Table 2 below summarises the conceptual frameworks used for religion (or religiousness) and spirituality in the research cited in this section that relate specifically to the 85 outcomes of interest to this thesis, namely, affective disorders (depression and anxiety), delusional ideation, and antisocial behaviour (aggression and delinquency). This summary shows clearly the lack of conceptual consistency across studies that have investigated these relationships in recent years. 86 Table 2: Summary of conceptual frameworks used to assess relationships between religiousness/spirituality and depression, anxiety, delusional ideation, and antisocial behaviour Study Constructs Indicators/operational definitions Affective disorders Baetz et al. (2004) Worship services Frequency of church attendance (depression) attendance Salience of Importance of the role of spiritual values or religiousness/spirituality faith Being spiritual or religious The extent individuals consider themselves to be spiritual or religious Corrigan et al. (2003) Religious Participation in a community of people who (depression and anxiety) gather around common ways of worship Spiritual Those who see themselves as part of a larger spiritual force Davis et al. (2003) Religious/spiritual meaning Effort made to make meaning out of life (anxiety) through religious/spiritual beliefs Pursuit of a relationship with Pursuit of a relationship with a higher force, the divine being, power, or God Spiritual wellbeing One’s sense of wellbeing in relation to God and one’s sense of life purpose and life satisfaction Kaldor and Francis (2002) Belief in God Four categories of belief – “There is a personal (positive, negative and God”; “There is some sort of spirit or life force”; balanced affect) “I don’t really know what to think”; “I don’t really think there is any sort of spirit, God, or life force”. Church attendance Frequency of church attendance Personal prayer Frequency of personal prayer Pearce et al. (2003) Being religious or spiritual Identification with being a spiritual or religious (depression) person Religious/spiritual support Using religious/spiritual community as a source of support Wink et al. (2005) Religiousness Importance of institutionalised beliefs and (depression) practices Spirituality Importance of noninstitutionalised beliefs and practices Wright et al. (1993) Religious/spiritual meaning Effort made to make meaning out of life (depression) through religious/spiritual beliefs Spiritual support Seeking spiritual support Delusional ideation Saucier and Skrzypinska Tradition-oriented religiosity Self-identification with spirituality expressed (2006) through traditional religious beliefs and practices* Subjective spirituality Self-identification with spirituality expressed through mysticism* Antisocial behaviour Good & Willoughby (2006) Religiosity Frequency of church attendance (aggression and delinquency) Spirituality Belief in God or a higher power Resnick et al. (1993) Spiritual connectedness Identification with being a religious or spiritual (aggressive and disturbed person behaviour) * See pages 61and 62 for detailed list of instruments used to differentiate tradition-oriented religiosity from subjective spirituality 87 Of these ten studies, only two (Davis, Kerr, & Kurpius, 2003; Wright, Frost, & Wisecarver, 1993) have used the same construct and indicator for investigating a dimension of the concept religion/spirituality – “religious/spiritual meaning”, measured by self- identification with the terms “spiritual” or “religious”. While three studies have used self- identification with being a religious or spiritual person to measure spirituality (Baetz, Griffin, Bowen et al., 2004; Pearce, Little, & Perez, 2003; Wright, Frost, & Wisecarver, 1993), one of these studies (Resnick, Harris, & Blum, 1993) conceives this to represent “spiritual connectedness”, rather than simply an individual’s self-perception of being religious or spiritual. The following section reviews literature based solely on traditional measures of religion. As highlighted in Section One, the following discussion highlights that the multidimensional nature of religion has led researchers to conceptualise and measure the concept religion in many different ways, with many of their studies ignoring the heterogeneity of groups by simply assigning individuals to particular groups by virtue of the frequency of their participation in religious services, or engagement in prayer or Bible study. Thus, those who hold strong traditional religious beliefs and values but do not meet these particular criteria are likely to be deemed ‘non-religious’. In addition, those who do participate in religious services but who reject religious doctrine and authority (and perhaps tend towards New Age beliefs and practices) might easily be assigned to ‘religious’ categories, despite their antagonistic attitude to religion, in studies where single measures of church attendance are used as the basis for group assignment. This is especially relevant for all those studies conducted from the 1970s onwards, when the widespread shift away from institutionalised religion and the rise of the New Spirituality became apparent. Section Two: Research evidence using traditional measures of religion, mental health and social behaviour Subsequent to Durkheim’s (1952 [1897]) research showing differential patterns of mental illness and suicide according to religious faith, numerous studies have examined the relationships between various measures of religion and mental health and social behaviour. At a superficial level, based on the number of positive, negative, and null effects found across studies, one could conclude that overall, religion is more beneficial than it is harmful. For example, Bergin (1983) who conducted a meta-analysis of studies from 1950 to 1980 that included at least one measure of religiosity and one measure of mental health status, found that religiosity appeared to have a beneficial effect on mental health outcomes in 47 per cent, 88 no effect in 30 per cent, and a negative effect in 23 per cent of the studies he examined. However, inconsistent and often contradictory findings on the relationship between religion and mental health have led some reviewers (Levin & Vanderpool, 1987; Sanua, 1969) to argue that there is no basis for supposing a relationship between the two, and others (for example Argyle, 1959; Scott, 1961) to conclude that no relationship exists at all (Gartner, 1996). Given that previous discussion highlights that single measures of religiosity are insufficient for determining the multifaceted nature of religion, it is not surprising that Bergin’s meta-analysis revealed inconsistent findings across studies. In recognition of the problems associated with the use of single measures of religion to determine relationships between religion and mental health, Ventis (1995) investigated differences in the association between religiosity and mental health across a range of studies where multiple measures of religion were incorporated. Ventis (1995), using a psychological approach, classified the independent variables from 197 findings derived from 61 studies, according to whether religion was used by individuals as a means, ends, or quest, conceiving that these domains tapped religious inclination (Batson, Schoenrade, & Ventis, 1993). It was found that religion as means (roughly equivalent to extrinsic religion) had predominantly negative associations with mental health indices such as absence of mental illness (11 negative, one positive, and seven showing no association) and appropriate social behaviour (four negative, zero positive, and one showing no association). By contrast, religion as ends (roughly equivalent to intrinsic religion) was found to have a predominantly positive relationship with the mental indices under examination. Eleven positive, one negative, and seven null associations were found for intrinsic religion and absence of mental illness, and five positive associations and one negative association were found for intrinsic religion and appropriate social behaviour. Religion as quest, a construct devised to capture a religious orientation that is “prominent for individuals who are concerned with religious issues but are open-minded to the possibility that there might be no certain answers to these questions” was found to have no positive associations, one negative association, and two null associations with the absence of mental illness (Ventis, 1995:36). No data was available for examining associations between religion as quest and appropriate social behaviour. These results might be taken by some to suggest that mental health is better for those whose religious commitment involves the internalising of religious norms (thus leading to more prosocial behaviour) than it is for those whose religious faith is based on the need for support or status. It is equally plausible however, that those who have mental health problems are more likely to report that they seek social and emotional support from religion since it is 89 likely that support becomes an issue when health problems are present. Furthermore, the intrinsic-extrinsic distinction has been the subject of much criticism since its original formulation by Allport (1959), for lacking conceptual clarity (Gorusch, 1984) and because factor analytic studies have revealed a more complex underlying structure than is suggested by the binary intrinsic/extrinsic classification (Kirkpatrick, 1989). Criticism levelled at the measurement strategies used in religious research continues to fuel debates about whether there is any real relationship between religion and mental health and social behaviour. Spilka and Werne (1971) argued in the early 1970s that “methodological complexities” are the most likely reason for observed inconsistencies in research findings on religion, rather than an indication that religion has no real relationship with mental health and behaviour. In order to test Spilka’s and Werne’s thesis, Gartner (1996) reviewed around 200 studies giving due consideration to both measurement strategies and the aspect of mental health being examined. Gartner (1996) conducted a computer search on Psychology Abstracts for the period from 1979 to 1989, using the letters religi and any one of 30 terms denoting psychopathology or an aspect of it, like anxiety for example, as search criteria. Gartner (1996) found that associations between religion and various outcomes largely depended on the measures used in each study. His findings are discussed below along with results from other studies according to specific categories of mental illness and social behaviour that are directly relevant to this thesis. Religion and depression In relation to depression, Gartner (1996:194) concluded that most of the evidence indicates that religiosity is associated with lower levels of depression. Four studies (Brown & Lowe, 1951; Hertsgaard & Light, 1984; Mayo, Puryear, & Richek, 1969; McClure & Loden, 1982) found a negative relationship between religious commitment and depression, and only one (Gupta, 1983) found higher levels of depression in religious subjects. Since Gupta’s study was conducted on a sample of Tibetan adolescents, Gartner (1996:194) speculated that this discrepant result might be due to cultural factors specific to Tibet. Another study (Spendlove, West, & Stanish, 1984) found infrequent church attendees to be twice as likely to be clinically depressed, but this relationship was no longer significant after adjustment for education, caring from spouse, health and income. Another review by McCullough and Larson (1999) considered 80 studies of religion and depression that were conducted over the past 100 years. Their review draws attention to the multidimensional nature of religion and the range of different relationships that have been 90 observed between various measures of religion and depression. In regard to religious affiliation for example, they note that Jews have consistently been found to have a higher risk for depression across numerous studies, and Pentecostalists appear to be more prone to depression than non-Pentecostalists according to four studies. Among 29 studies incorporating measures of religious organisational involvement (usually frequency of church attendance), 24 found that involvement with religious organisations was associated with lower levels of depressive symptoms. The remaining studies found either no association between religious organisational involvement and depression, or an association so small as to be nearly zero. Multi-item measures of beliefs and behaviours identified by McCullough and Larson (1999:130) as measures of “general religious involvement”, including indicators of, for example, church attendance, private religious practices such as prayer, and self-rated importance of one’s faith, have generally been shown to be negatively associated with depressive symptoms. However, McCullough and Larson (1999:130) highlight that studies that control simultaneously for factors such as religious affiliation and public religious involvement tend to find that the significance of associations between general religiousness and depression falls to trivial levels. They also conclude that frequency of prayer and private religious activity has a tenuous relationship with depression, and that religious motivation assessed by single- item measures show only weak relationships with lower levels of depressive symptoms (McCullough & Larson, 1999). By contrast, multi-item measures of intrinsic religion have been shown to have a persistent negative relationship with depressive symptoms, with a persistent inverse relationship being observed for multi-item measures of extrinsic religion. It remains unknown of course from McCullough’s and Larson’s research (1999) what mechanisms actually protect religious individuals from depression – whether it is the valuing of religious faith, the sense of meaning religion provides the individual, the beliefs that are embraced by religious individuals and how these affect their daily lives, the social support that accompanies involvement with religious organisations, or the combined effect of two or more of these factors. This again raises the issue of the multidimensional nature of religion, and the difficulties associated with interpreting observed effects. More recent studies provide further evidence of the link between religion and depression. One study conducted in the Netherlands suggests that the importance placed on religion is associated with a reduction in risk for developing depression. Using a one-year follow-up of participants, Braam (1997) found that those who indicated that a strong religious faith was one of the three most important factors in their life had significantly lower risk for becoming depressed compared to those who did not ascribe such importance to their religious 91 faith. Among elderly depressed patients hospitalized with a medical illness, a 10-point increase in an intrinsic religion score was found to be associated with a 70 per cent increase in speed of remission from depression, even after controlling for multiple demographic, psychosocial, physical health and treatment factors (Koenig, George, & Peterson, 1998). Little research attention has been directed toward the relationship between religion and depression among younger age groups. Schapman and Inderbitzen-Nolan (2002) sought to address this gap in the literature by enrolling 261 participants aged between 13 and 18 years from urban middle and high schools in a Midwestern, mid-sized city in the United States. Seventy-three participants were Christian, 11.5 per cent reported having no religious affiliation and 2.3 per cent where affiliated with non-Christian religions. Affiliation data was missing for 13.2 per cent of the sample. Participants were grouped on the basis of religious activity assessed from scores on the Religious Behaviour Questionnaire (RBQ) and depression was assessed from student responses to the Child Depression Inventory (CDI) (Kovacs & Beck, 1977). Frequency of attendance at formal services, and attending religion class were both found to be negatively related to CDI subscales of interpersonal stress (r = -0.17; r = -0.16), ineffectiveness (r = -0.22 r = -0.22), and anhedonia (r = -0.20; r = -0.19) (all significant at P =< 0.01). Frequency of praying outside of formal services was negatively associated with interpersonal distress (r = -0.27) and ineffectiveness (r = -0.19) (P < 0.01). Frequency of reading the Bible was unrelated to any of the CDI subscales, and no significant correlations were found between any of the religious activity measures and negative mood and negative self-esteem. Religion and anxiety Gartner (1996:195), like Sanua (1969) and Bergin (1983) before him, concluded that findings on the relationship between religion and anxiety are inconsistent. Gartner (1996) drew this conclusion after observing that four studies reported religious subjects as being more anxious (Gupta, 1983; Hassan & Khalique, 1981; Spellman, Baskett, & Byrne, 1971; Wilson & Miller, 1968), and three studies reported them as being less anxious than non- religious subjects (Hertsgaard & Light, 1984; Williams & Cole, 1968) or less anxious after participation in religious pilgrimage (Morris, 1982), and three studies reporting no relationship between anxiety and religiosity (Brown, 1962; Epstein, Tamir, & Natan, 1985 ; Heintzelman & Fehr, 1976). More recently, Shreve-Neiger and Edelestein (2004) conducted a review of the literature on religion and anxiety, reporting results from 16 studies conducted between 1962 and 1997, 92 and like Gartner (1996), observed inconsistent findings across studies. Only three studies were reviewed by both Shreve-Neiger and Edelestein (2004) and Gartner (1996) in their respective reviews. Shreve-Neiger and Edelestein (2004) give detailed accounts of the samples, measures and methods used by the studies under examination and highlights the lack of conceptual and methodological uniformity within religious research, as well as the inconsistency in findings (11 beneficial effects, seven harmful effects, and five null associations were found between various measures of religiosity and anxiety). A summary table of Shreve-Neiger’s and Edelstein’s (2004) findings has been prepared and is provided in Appendix B as a means of highlighting the methodological complexities associated with religious research in general, and the difficulties one encounters when attempting to draw conclusions about the mental health- religiosity relationship from available evidence. Most notable is that out of the 16 studies examined, four used samples comprising only those who were religiously affiliated or involved with religious organisations (Baker & Gorusch, 1982; Finney & Malony, 1985; Petersen & Roy, 1985; Tapanya, Nicki, & Jarusawad, 1997), and thus their analyses are restricted to different levels of religiousness and have no capacity to inform us about the influence of religion by comparing religious and non-religious individuals. Eight of the studies are based on undergraduate student samples (Bergin, Masters, & Richards, 1987; Brown, 1962; Fehr & Heintzelman, 1977; Frenz & Carey, 1989; Heintzelman & Fehr, 1976; Sturgeon & Hamley, 1979; Williams & Cole, 1968; Wilson & Miller, 1968), and thus their findings only relate to young adults with high educational status and may be confounded by students’ subjective perceptions of how they should respond within an educational setting. Only one study used measures taken at more than one time point (Williams, Larson, Buckler, Heckmann, & Pyle, 1991). Overall, the evidence reviewed by Shreve-Neiger and Edelstein suggests that more frequent church attendance is related to lower levels of anxiety (Hertsgaard & Light, 1984; Petersen & Roy, 1985; Williams, Larson, Buckler et al., 1991), that within a rural setting Catholic women appear to be more anxious than women of other affiliations (Hertsgaard & Light, 1984), and that those whose religious orientation is intrinsic in nature appear to be less anxious than those with an extrinsic religious orientation (Baker & Gorusch, 1982; Tapanya, Nicki, & Jarusawad, 1997; Wilson & Miller, 1968). The study by Spellman et al. (1971) indicates that sudden religious conversion is associated with higher levels of anxiety, compared to regular church attenders and those who never attend church. Whether the higher anxiety levels observed among the converted in this study preceded or followed the process of conversion is unknown. Engagement in numerous religious activities including church attendance, personal prayer, reading religious materials, Sunday school attendance, and other 93 church-related activities appear to be linked to lower levels of anxiety in early adulthood (Williams & Cole, 1968). Shreve-Neiger and Edelstein (2004:284) concluded from this finding that either “more secure persons tend to become religious, religion facilitates security, or religious individuals do not openly admit their insecurities”. However, it needs to be borne in mind that all but one of the studies reviewed by Shreve-Neiger and Edelstein rely on evidence gathered between 15 and 44 years ago, with the most recent study by Tapanya and colleagues being undertaken nearly a decade ago. Thus, the majority of these findings may hold little relevance to religiosity within a contemporary setting. Apart from evidence gathered from undergraduate samples, little research attention has been directed towards the association between religion and anxiety among population samples of younger age groups. However, Schapman and Inderbitzen-Nolan (2002), who examined depression among adolescents from urban middle and high schools in the United States, also investigated levels of anxiety according to student responses to the 37 items that form the Revised Children’ Manifest Anxiety Scale (RCMAS) (Reynolds & Richmond, 1978). The only significant correlations found between religious activities and anxiety involved attendance at formal religious services and religion classes and physiological (and not psychological) indicators of anxiety. Both correlations were negative but weak (both r = -0.13; P < 0.05). Religion and delusional thoughts The evidence cited in Section One of this chapter identified new forms of religiosity as being strongly linked to delusional ideation. Studies that have used traditional measures of religion such as religious affiliation and levels of religious activity, have tended to focus on delusional ideation that is religious in content, rather than a broad spectrum of content. For example, Getz and colleagues (2001) found that Protestants were more likely to report religious delusions than Catholics (OR=3.8, 95%CI=1.3,11.1 P < 0.02) and to report more religious delusions than the non-affiliated group (OR=2.5, 95%CI=1.0,6.5 P < 0.06). No differences were found in the frequency of delusions between African-American Protestants and Caucasian Protestants. When examining all patients, and adjusting for race, the amount of religious practice (measured from a Likert scale 0 = “not active” to 4 = “very active”) was associated with higher ratings of religious delusions (R = 0.27, P < 0.01). However, no differences were found between Catholics, Protestants and those non-affiliated with any religion in regard to the severity of religious delusions, as indicated by levels of preoccupation with delusional beliefs (F = 0.95, df = 2, P = 0.40). Earlier studies show that there is an increase in the strength of religious beliefs following 94 psychiatric illness (Kirov, Kemp, Kirov, & David, 1998), that delusions that are religious in theme or content are common among psychiatric patients with psychotic symptoms (Brewerton, 1994; Neeleman & Lewis, 1994), and that psychiatric patients have stronger religious beliefs than practising non-psychiatric patients, regardless of demographics, ethnicity, or social class (Kroll & Sheehan, 1989; Neeleman & Lewis, 1994). The study by Peters et al. (1999) reported in Section One of this chapter, has shown that when a broad spectrum of delusional content is assessed, there are no significant differences in the total number of delusional ideation items endorsed by Christians (mean 7.2; standard deviation 5.0) and those unaffiliated with a religion (mean 6.5; standard deviation 5.0). The link between religiosity and psychosis warrants further investigation. Even though delusions with religious themes or content are common among psychiatric patients with psychotic symptoms, and religious beliefs have been found to be strengthened following psychiatric illness, the lack of available longitudinal data prevents any conclusions being made that the religiously inclined are prone towards psychosis, since it is equally plausible that mental illness itself precipitates delusions of a religious nature. Moreover, the increase in paranormal beliefs and mystical experiences, and the development of many NRMS that actively promote these kinds of beliefs and experiences indicate a need to investigate whether religious, paranormal, and mystical beliefs serve to maintain or undermine healthy functioning. Religion and social behaviour In regard to delinquency, Gartner (1996) found from the studies he reviewed (conducted by Argyle & Beit-Hallahmi, 1975; Lea, 1982; Sanua, 1969), that delinquents were no less religious in their beliefs than non-delinquents, and that the rate of church attendance in a community was not correlated with the crime rate (Sanua, 1969). However, personal church attendance was found to correlate negatively with delinquency in five of six studies reviewed by Argyle and Beit-Hallahmi (1975). Gartner (1996) argues that while these findings may appear to be inconsistent at first glance, closer inspection of these results shows that there is a consistent negative correlation between religious participation, but no relationship between religious beliefs, and delinquency. However, findings from more recent research by Benda and Corwyn (1997) suggests that church attendance measures alone are insufficient for determining relationships between religiosity and delinquency, particularly among adolescent samples. Benda and Corwyn (1997) argue that church attendance among the young is likely to reflect family or peer pressure, more than it does religious commitment, and their findings support this position. Their study investigated status offences (running away, fake excuses for 95 absences from school, and skipping school), property crime (breaking and entering, theft from lockers, and stealing), and person crimes (gang fights, robbery by force, and other fighting) among 724 public high school students randomly selected and evenly distributed across grades 9 through 12 from three schools in Arkansas. One factor evangelism, based on a five-point scale measuring how often individuals spend time “talking about religion with family and friends”, “sharing joys and problems of religious life”, and “trying to convert someone”, stood out as protecting against criminal behaviour while other factors related to religiosity and key demographic influences were unrelated. Using multiple hierarchical regression analyses, it was found that evangelism was significantly and negatively associated with criminal offences, while no significant associations were found for race, father’s education, age, family structure, residence (rural or urban), religiosity (as assessed by a summed measure of time in prayer, Bible study, and financial contribution to church organisations), or church attendance. Benda and Corwyn (1997) concluded that their measure of “evangelism” is likely to tap the application of religious doctrine more directly than measures like church attendance, Bible study, or prayer. Status offences by contrast, were found to be unrelated to any of the religious variables under study, with significant associations only being found for age (positive) and residence in a rural location (negative). A recent systematic review of studies conducted between 1987 and 1997 (Johnson, De Li, Larson et al., 2000) suggests that overall, religiosity is negatively associated with delinquent behaviour. Considering 40 studies, with sample sizes ranging from 123 to 34,129, Johnson et al. (2000) deduced that the majority of studies (75.0%) found a negative effect on delinquency and that five studies (12.5%) found no effect, three (7.5%) found a mixed effect, one (2.5%) found a positive effect, and one (2.5%) did not specify any effect. Johnson and colleagues (2000:44-45) observed that studies based on reliable measures of religious commitment appeared more likely to find a negative or beneficial relationship between religiosity and delinquency than those which failed to assess the reliability of their measures. In regard to aggressive behaviour, Benda and Toombs (2000) investigated whether church attendance or a multiple measure of religiosity (regular church attendance, Bible study, prayer, and efforts to convert others) better predicted crimes against persons or violence among 600 male inmates of an Arkansas boot camp, aged between 14 and 47 years (mean age: 25.3). Religiosity was found to be inversely related to violence after adjustment for a wide range of demographic, familial, behavioural, and individual factors, while church attendance was not. 96 Religious background and development Luckmann (1967) argued nearly four decades ago, that there may be a long-lasting effect of parental religious tradition on their offspring, even if offspring appeared to reject the religious tradition of their parents. Luckmann (1967) suggested that the religion of parents, which he termed “official religion” would eventually die out with succeeding generations, leading to the uptake of a religious outlook that might be completely different to this “official religion”. The possibility that religious values and beliefs instilled in children during the developing years continue to exert some influence over the long-term raises the question of whether an individual’s religious background is connected to his or her mental health and social behaviour in adulthood. Religious values and beliefs that are inculcated in childhood, may help shape an individual’s attitudes to substance use and other risky behaviours, and his or her perception of themselves, sense of moral duty and obligation to others, and social behaviour. School-based programs aimed at reducing health-risk behaviours among 18 year- olds (multiple sexual partners and heavy alcohol consumption) have been found to be effective, when begun in the early primary school years (grades 1 and 2) and implemented again in late primary school (grades 5 and 6), and to have no effect when restricted to late primary school (grades 5 and 6 only) (Hawkins, Catalano, Kosterman, Abbott, & Hill, 1999). This evidence suggests that childhood (around six to seven years of age) may be a crucial stage for the shaping of values, beliefs, and attitudes that persist over the long term. There is now increasing interest in the role of family and cultural norms for their influence on the development of competent and resilient youth (Varon & Riley, 1999). Findings from cross-sectional studies show regular maternal church attendance is negatively associated with adolescent aggression (McCullough & Larson, 1999), and that frequent child church attendance is associated with lower levels of aggression and less likelihood of getting into fights among 11 year olds (Abbotts, Williams, Sweeting, & West, 2004). While Varon and Riley (1999) found that there was no association between maternal church attendance (or family income) and delinquent behaviour among 11 to 13 year olds, they did observe that maternal church attendance was a stronger predictor of some aspects of child mental health and social functioning than traditional demographic measures such as gender, race, mother’s religion, or maternal education. Youths whose mothers attended religious services at least once a week were found to have greater overall satisfaction with their lives, more involvement with their families, better skills in solving health related problems, and felt greater support from friends than those whose mothers had lower levels of participation in religious services. 97 Negative associations have also been found between frequent church attendance and suicide attempts among 15 to 24 year olds (Kirmayer, 1998) and suicide ideation among 14 to 25 year olds (Kirmayer, Malus, & Boothroyd, 1996). However, it is argued that church attendance might not be a good measure for investigating causal associations between religiosity and suicide, since depression and other conditions are likely to reduce activity levels in general, including attendance at religious services (Matthews et al. 1998). Yet findings from a study that investigated religious commitment rather than religious activity lend support to the view that religiosity might protect against suicide. Using a sample of 1098 Catholics with a mean age of 15.9 years, Greening and Stoppelbein (2002) found that personal commitment to core Christian beliefs was inversely related to self-perceived suicide risk. From the evidence cited above, it remains difficult to know the nature of the actual mechanisms that might be involved in the negative associations between church attendance and child aggression and adolescent/young adult suicide risk. Church attendance of either mother or child may reflect the child’s internalisation of norms that prohibit aggressive behaviour – either directly through the doctrines taught within church organisations, or indirectly through the values instilled in the child by church attending mothers. Cross- sectional data also gives no indication as to the degree that the negative associations between maternal and child church attendance and child aggression are a reflection of current involvement with religious organisations or a consequence of values and norms that were instilled in the child at an earlier stage of their lives. Summary of evidence related to religion From the review of the empirical literature provided above, it appears that regular participation in religious services is predominantly associated with lower levels of depression, though the observed effects appear to be somewhat modest. Depression among women has been found to vary according to religious affiliation. The findings related to anxiety are inconsistent and those studies that have used young adult samples have largely been convenient samples and provide little insight into the association between religion and anxiety for young adults within the general population. The body of evidence related to religion and delusional ideation suggests that religious ideation differs by religious affiliation, and that members of NRMs have much higher levels of delusional ideation than Christians. However, from the available empirical data, it remains unclear whether the delusions reported by NRM members lead them to join NRMs, or if NRM membership leads to delusional ideation. Regular church attendance by mothers or their offspring appear to be strongly related to lower 98 levels of offspring aggression and delinquency. Whether these associations reflect the influence of religious participation at the time aggression or delinquency is measured more than they do the religious values that were inculcated during childhood is unclear. Most importantly, the bulk of the extant literature on religion and anxiety, depression, and antisocial behaviour rests on data gathered one or more decades ago and may therefore have little relevance to a contemporary setting. In addition, this set of literature does not consider forms of religiosity that remain invisible when studies use constructs and measures that tap only traditional forms of religion and religiousness. It is also noteworthy that even though the move away from institutionalised religion towards privatised religion was evident as far back as the 1970s, with this period corresponding with the rise in popularity of New Age beliefs and the development of many NRMs, the majority of researchers have persisted in using outdated theoretical frameworks to investigate the religion-mental health relationship. Non-traditional beliefs might be of central importance to some churchgoers and thus confound results that are attributed to participation in church or religious services, just as traditional religious beliefs among non-churchgoers might confound findings attributed to those who never attend church. Overall, Krause’s (1993) identification of religious beliefs as being the most under-researched component of religion appears to be as true today as it was more than a decade ago. Efforts to grapple with the influence that privatised forms of religiosity, whether traditional or non-traditional in nature have only really begun to be made during the past decade, with the inclusion of religion/spirituality as a concept that covers both privatised/institutionalised and traditional/non-traditional forms of religiosity. Yet even this can only be considered as a ‘first step’ towards investigating religiosity as it exists today’s world. A significant weakness of some research into religion is that the “no religion” group is often left out of analyses or that convenient samples are used, providing little insight as to the extent that religion influences people’s mental health and social behaviour at a population level. Criticism is often levelled at the reliance on single measures of religion to determine religion-mental health outcomes among large populations. Yet it remains that many population datasets only have single measures of religion due to lack of interest in this area among those responsible for survey designs. The inclusion of multiple measures of religion also raise issues of participant “burn-out” in cases where survey forms are already lengthy and those interested in the area of religion have to compete with other researchers for space for survey items. This is no doubt one of the reasons for some researchers having opted to use 99 singular measures of religiousness/spirituality, rather than separate measures. Perhaps most important however is that the scientific study of religion (and spirituality) often fails to consider that religion exists within particular social, political, cultural and historical contexts. These aspects require due consideration when interpreting evidence related to religion and spirituality and also raise doubts about the legitimacy of attempts aimed to determine the extent that religion is beneficial or harmful “overall”, especially when the evidence being assessed spans different time periods (for example Gartner’s review spanned studies conducted over 100 years). The quality of evidence related to religion, spirituality, and mental health and social behaviour In order to draw conclusions about the quality of available evidence on religion, spirituality, and the outcomes of interest in this thesis, it is necessary to focus on the body of literature discussed in Section One of this chapter. The studies reviewed in this body of literature examine a range of dimensions of religiousness and/or spirituality that encompass beliefs, organisational involvement, R/S orientation, self-ratings of being religious and/or spiritual, and subjective assessments of an individual’s commitment to, and self-perceived importance of, religion and/or spirituality. Those studies that rely on conflated measures of religion (or religiousness) and spirituality provide some insight into differences in outcome between individuals who are religiously and/or spiritually inclined and those who are conceived to be neither religious nor spiritual. Alternatively, these studies provide an indication of the extent that outcomes differ according to different levels of religiousness/spirituality. However, conclusions drawn from interpretations of the results of these studies are necessarily constrained by, and dependent upon, the operational definition used for the construct religiousness/spirituality in each study. Binary, categorical measures of this construct assume religiousness and spirituality to be a single phenomenon that sets individuals apart from others who are “non-religious/non-spiritual” – thereby reducing a multidimensional phenomenon to a simplistic binary construct. While Likert scales serve to avoid this oversimplification of complex phenomenon to some degree, they still assume that an individual’s level of religiousness and spirituality lies somewhere on a continuum between two extremes, such as “very religious/spiritual” and “not at all religious/spiritual”. These binary and continuum approaches to the study of religiousness and spirituality inevitably disregard the social, political, cultural, and historical factors that have given rise to the development of non-religious varieties of spirituality and the manifold ways that religious and 100 non-religious varieties of spirituality deviate from one another in terms of beliefs and practices. Unitary measures of the concept religiousness/spirituality would thus seem to be of little value within investigations aimed at determining the influence of contemporary religiosity on mental health, social behaviour, or other domains of mental and emotional wellbeing. The strength of those studies that have used measures (single or multiple) which distinguish religion from spirituality clearly lies in their capacity to identify the presence or absence of associations between each of these orientations and specific outcomes of interest and the similarity or otherwise of their respective associations. However, the majority of studies that have differentiated spirituality and religion are cross-sectional in design and thus it is unclear whether observed associations reflect causality, reverse causality, or the effects of confounding in instances where potential confounders have not been considered in statistical analyses. While prospective longitudinal studies provide an opportunity to disentangle the causal sequence involved in relationships found between religiousness and spirituality, and mental and behavioural outcomes, only one study that has used prospective longitudinal data for this purpose was available for review in this thesis (Wink et al. 2005). One particular strength of this study is that the sample was assigned to the categories religiousness and spirituality through the incorporation of both qualitative and quantitative methods (interviews and questionnaires), with a range of institutionalised and non-institutionalised beliefs and practices being considered. This mixed methods approach has advantages over secondary data analysis alone since this approach enables consideration of the meanings individuals ascribe to their religious and spiritual beliefs and practices, as well as the self-perceived importance of religiousness or spirituality in these same individuals’ lives. However, the use of a mixed methods approach for assignment of individuals to “religious” or “spiritual” categories may be infeasible for very large longitudinal studies due to the costs and logistics associated with interviewing an entire cohort involving thousands of participants. For example, the Wink et al. (2005) study is based on an original sample of 505, with a total of 300 individuals taking part in at least one of the three interviews conducted between early and late adulthood. A total of 184 (61.3%) of this 300 were available for interview in late adulthood. The numbers interviewed during the three interview phases were 156, 151, and 143 respectively (representing 30.1%, 29.9%, and 28.3% of the original sample). Thus, less than two hundred interviews were conducted during any one phase, making it much more feasible for this particular study to incorporate both a qualitative and quantitative component in follow-ups for the purpose of group assignment, than is feasible for studies that track and undertake follow- ups on much larger samples. The incorporation of a qualitative component in larger studies is 101 more likely to be feasible however, if based on data gathered from sub-groups. This has the advantage of providing a means to explore the nature of mechanisms that might be involved in associations observed from secondary data analysis between measures of religion and spirituality, and the outcomes of interest for an entire cohort. However, the feasibility of this particular approach is necessarily dependent upon the scope of a given study, and the extent that additional follow-up is conceived to threaten the future viablity of an ongoing study by compromising response rates at future phases among those selected for sub-groups. The level of attrition in the Wink et al. (2005) study also raises issues of attrition bias – a problem common to all longitudinal studies that follow participants over time, especially when follow-ups take place over an extensive period. While Wink et al. (2005) highlight that prior analyses of the data used in their study revealed very little bias from sample attrition, other than a slight tendency for lower participation rates among individuals with lower levels of education, this study may also be subject to sampling bias. The original study sample comprises samples taken from three separate studies. These include one birth cohort (systematic selection of every third child born, n=248), 61 healthy full-term infants born at two separate hospitals (16 of which were members of the same birth cohort, but this particular sample was restricted to offspring of white, English speaking parents). The third study’s sample comprises 212 youngsters from five different elementary schools in California who signified their intention to attend the specific junior high school in Oakland, California that formed the centre of observation for the Oakland Growth Study. These youngsters were approximately seven years older than the birth cohort samples and were limited to Caucasian children (Huffine & Aerts, 1998). The study sample as a whole therefore represents a mix of sampling methods drawing from a cohort born in Berkeley, California, and children aged 10 to 12 years attending school in the California region. The availability of longitudinal data in the Wink et al. (2005) study enabled researchers to consider key potential confounders in their effort to determine whether religiousness and spirituality provide a buffer against depression associated with poor physical health. They were thus able to demonstrate that the negative association observed between religiousness in early adulthood and depression in late adulthood was independent of wellbeing (used as a proxy for depression) and poor physical health at earlier stages of the life course, and was also independent of the magnitude and strength of social networks that individuals had available to them in late adulthood. However, it remains unclear whether or not socioeconomic factors confound this association, since no measure of socioeonomic status was included in the statistical models used for analyses. Nevertheless, a major strength of this study lies in its 102 capacity to reveal differential relationships between religiousness and between spirituality, measured concurrently and at earlier stages of the life course (early and middle adulthood) and depression in late adulthood, while simultaneously controlling for pre-existing health problems and low levels of wellbeing. The methodological approach used by the Wink et al. (2005) study has significant advantages over other studies that treat religiousness/spirituality as a singular construct and those which use separate constructs but rely on cross-sectional data. The former precludes the detection of differences in outcome between the religiously and spiritually inclined, while the latter approach prevents determinations being made about the causal sequence that might be involved in observed associations. From the discussion above it becomes clear that the multidimensional nature of the concepts religion and spirituality, as well as the respective strengths and weaknesses of quantitative and qualitative methods, creates substantial challenges for researchers who seek a comprehensive understanding of the religion- and spirituality-mental health relationships. Nevertheless, Zinnbauer and colleagues (1999:914) argue that despite the limitations associated with reliance on any one investigatory tool like case studies, surveys, narrative analyses, observational studies, correlational analyses, or experimentation, together these “supplement each other and yield a more complete picture of religious and spiritual experience”. While due attention needs to be given to the respective weaknesses of any one of these methods when interpreting the findings yielded from them, it remains that the complexity of the phenomena religiousness and spirituality is such that it is impossible for any one study to consider all of the dimensions involved in these phenomena. The limitations associated with any particular method/s used within an investigation into religiousness and spirituality and their respective relationships with mental health and behaviour therefore need to be weighed against the contribution this investigation makes to furthering our understanding of the connection between religiosity and health in general. The weaknesses associated with any given study also serve to inform the design of future studies that seek to refine and improve the methods used within this field of enquiry. In addition, each investigation draws attention to the current limits of our understanding of the religiosity- health relationship and is therefore instrumental in progressing efforts aimed at expanding the existing body of knowledge on this topic. Having reviewed the empirical literature on the topics that are relevant to this thesis, the following chapter outlines the methodological approach used for the current study, giving due consideration to characteristics of the study sample and attrition rates over time. 103 Chapter Five: Methodology This chapter outlines the methodological approach being used for the current investigation. The study sample is described in detail, as well as the measures and methods of secondary data analysis used in this research. Attrition rates among the study sample are also discussed. Methods Participants Data were derived from the Mater-University Study of Pregnancy (MUSP), a prospective longitudinal study of maternal and child health. Consecutive pregnant women attending their first obstetric visit at the Mater Mothers Hospital in Brisbane, Australia between January 1981 and December 1983 were invited to join the study (N=8556) and 8458 (99%) agreed to participate. Enrolment was restricted to public patients. Public patients accounted for 46 per cent of all deliveries at the Mater Misericordiae Hospital between 1981 and 1983 (Ware, Williams, & Aird, 2006). Of the 8,458 who agreed to participate in the study, a total of 7,223 live singleton infants, 58 sets of twins, and one set of triplets were born at the study hospital between 1981 and 1984. The social and psychological characteristics of the study sample have been previously described (see Keeping, Najman, Morrison, Western, Andersen, & Williams, 1989). Follow-ups of the study mothers and their children were conducted at 3-5 days, 6 months, and 5, 14, and 21 years after the birth of the child. Medical records of the delivery were also accessed from the study hospital. Eligibility criteria for entry to the study were set as those mothers who delivered a live singleton infant at the study hospital, and whose child was alive when discharged from hospital (N = 7,223). About 70 per cent of the study children remained in the study at the 5-year and 14-year follow-ups, with some 60 per cent being available at both follow-ups. Around 52.3 per cent (N=3,777) participated in the 21-year follow-up between 2001 and 2004. The present analyses are limited to the birth cohort who participated in both the 21-year and 14-year follow-ups, and for whom data was available for all items of specific interest, including religious background information obtained from mother report at entry to the study and at the time of the 5-year follow-up. Sample sizes vary according to the availability of relevant data for each set of analyses, and are reported with the results in Chapter Six. Slightly more females (52.6%) than males (47.4%) participated in the 21-year follow-up (MUSP21), with the age of these young adults at this stage ranging between 18 and 24 years (mean age 20.6 years). 104 The original child cohort was born in one of Australia’s large capital cities during the early 1980s, to mothers who were predominantly affiliated with a Christian religion at that time. Around 13.7 per cent of the study mothers reported that they were unaffiliated with any religion at commencement to the study, and 1.3 per cent reported being affiliated with a non- Christian religion. Even though the hospital where mothers were recruited for the study is a Catholic hospital, slightly more of the study mothers were Anglican (29.5%) than Catholic (28%). Around 74.3 per cent of the study mothers were born in Australia, and around 4.4 per cent of the original birth cohort had at least one parent of Asian background, and another 6.8 per cent had at least one parent of Aboriginal, Torres Strait Islander, Maori, or other racial background. Since the study mothers were all public patients, the offspring sample tends to over-represent those born to mothers of low socioeconomic status and thus under-represent those born of high socioeconomic status. Due to the longitudinal nature of the MUSP study (from the prenatal period until 21- years post-delivery), as well as its focus on both mothers and their offspring, the MUSP dataset has the capacity to make a valuable contribution to the empirical literature in regard to the influence of religious background in the early stage of the life course on religious/spiritual beliefs and practices in young adulthood. This study also provides a unique opportunity to investigate the relative importance of current religiosity and religious background to young adult mental health and social behaviour. Measures Young adult religiosity Traditional and non-traditional religious/spiritual beliefs During the 21-year follow-up, the young adult respondents completed survey forms that asked them to circle one of three responses (1=No; 2=Yes; 3=Don’t know) to each of the following questions: “Do you believe in God?” and “Do you believe in a spiritual or higher power other than God?” The two higher values for this item were reversed coded (1=No; 2=Don’t know: 3=Yes). The item related to belief in God is conceived to capture all those whose form of religiosity remains rooted in traditional thought (Christian or non-Christian). The belief in a spiritual or higher power item is conceived to capture all those whose conception of the divine deviates from traditional religious thought and is consistent with a conception of the divine that is characteristic of the New Spirituality. The inclusion of the phrase “other than God” in this item serves to differentiate belief in a spiritual or higher power as an alternative belief system to traditional religious thought. This phrase distinguishes those who conceive the 105 divine as some sort of spiritual or higher power and as something different from God, from those who conceive God as taking the form of a spiritual or higher power. Frequency of church attendance Young adult respondents were asked to circle one of four responses to the question “How often do you go to church?” (Weekly=1; Monthly=2; Less than once a month=3; Never=4). Items were recoded so that lower values represented no church attendance and higher values represented greater frequency of church attendance (1=Never; 2=Less than once a month; 3=Monthly; 4=Weekly). These categories were collapsed into three for the purposes of analyses related to anxiety/depression, delusional ideation and externalising behaviour, due to the small numbers in the monthly category (1=Never; 2=Monthly or less; 3=Weekly). Frequency of religious practices At the time of the 21-year follow-up, the young adults were asked “How often do you participate in religious activities (eg. prayer, religious rituals)?” (1=Never; 2=Less than once a month;3=Monthly; 4=Weekly; 5=Daily). This variable was recoded (1=Never; 2=Less than once a month; 3=Weekly to monthly; Daily=4). This variable was used solely for the purpose of comparing the extent that the churchgoing and non-churchgoing groups engage in religious practices and rituals. This variable was not included in the analyses examining anxiety/depression, delusional ideation, or antisocial behaviour, since it provides no indication as to whether or not the frequency of engagement in these activities involves one or more practices, or the nature of these practices – that is, whether they take the form of traditional religious practices like prayer, Eastern meditation, or other rituals. Religious background Maternal religious affiliation At entry to the study, mothers completed survey forms that asked them to circle one of five responses to the question “What is your current religion?” (1=Catholic; 2=Church of England; 3=Other protestant; 4=No religion/Agnostic/Atheist, 5=Other, please specify). Responses to this question yielded 39 different categories of religious affiliation. Due to the small numbers within some of these categories, responses to this item were recoded into eight groups (1=Catholic; 2=Anglican; 3=Other Christian; 4=Pentecostal; 5=Non-Christian; 6=Not defined; 7=Refused to answer; 8=No religion). Responses were checked against classifications of religious groups contained within the Australian Standard Classification of Religious Groups (ABS, 1996) to ensure the accuracy of coding. Those included in the non- 106 Christian category within the study sample include those young adults whose mothers were Buddhist (n=11), Baha’i (n=1), Moslem (14), and Ananda Marga (n=1). The eight-category variable for religious affiliation was used solely for the analyses examining connections between maternal religious affiliation and young adult religiosity. Since the analyses examining anxiety/depression and antisocial behaviour are separated by gender, sample sizes for the Pentecostal, non-Christian, not defined, and refused to answer categories became too small for proper analysis. Therefore, the maternal religious affiliation item was recoded into five groups including Catholic (1=1), Anglican (2=2), Other Christian (3,4=3), Other groups (5,6,7=4), and No Religion (8=5) for these two sets of analyses. Since the delusional ideation analyses involve the total sample (both females and males), the Pentecostal group was able to be kept as a distinct category for this set of analyses. The non-Christian and non-defined groups category were too small to be kept as separate categories, and thus were assigned to a single category “Other”, since estimates related to these groups became unstable when treated as separate groups. For these particular analyses, the eight-category religious affiliation variable was re-coded into seven categories: Catholic (1=1), Anglican (2=2), Other Christian (3=3), Pentecostal (4=4), Other (5,6=5), Refused to Answer (7=6), and No religion (8=7). Maternal belief in God At entry to the study, mothers were asked an identical question to that asked of the young adults during the 21-year follow-up. Recoding procedures followed those used for young adult responses to the item. Due to the small number of mothers responding “No” or “Don’t know” to this item, mother responses were classified as either “No/don’t know” (value of 1) or “Yes” (value of 2). Maternal church attendance during the child’s early years Mothers were asked an identical question about frequency of church attendance at entry to the study and during the 5-year follow-up, to that asked of the young adults during the 21- year follow-up. Responses were recoded in the same way as young adult responses to these items. Maternal church attendance at 5 years was used for measuring maternal church attendance during childhood, with the exception of those mothers who failed to participate in the 5-year follow-up. For these cases (n=29), data related to frequency of church attendance at entry to the study was used instead, in order to maximise the sample size for the current study. The vast majority of mothers who attended church at 5 years also attended church at the first clinic visit (80.0%). It would be reasonable to assume therefore, that around six (20%) of these 29 cases may have stopped attending church at some stage between pregnancy and the child’s 107 fifth birthday, resulting in approximately six cases being misclassified. However, this number accounts for less than 0.01 per cent of the sample under study and is thus unlikely to impact on the study findings. Nevertheless, sensitivity analyses were undertaken to test whether or not this approach had produced any biased estimates, and the results of these additional analyses are reported in Chapter Six. Young adult anxiety/depression During the 21-year follow-up, participants completed Achenbach’s (1997) Young Adult Self Report (YASR), a 114-item instrument that asks respondents to choose the answer that best describes their behaviour over the past 6 months (0=Not true; 1= Somewhat or sometimes true; 2=Very true or often true). Anxiety/depression was assessed according to summed scores for 17 items included in the anxiety/depression subscale (standardized alpha coefficient = 0.91). Young adult females and males were categorised as being anxious/depressed or not anxious/depressed according to the gender cut-offs devised by Achenbach for the borderline threshold of clinical level anxiety/depression (based on normative samples). The mean score for female anxiety/depression among the MUSP sample was found to be similar to that found by Achenbach (9.4 versus 9.3), but slightly lower for male anxiety/depression (6.8 versus 7.5). The YASR subscales are reported to have good reliability and validity (Achenbach, 1997; Ferdinand & Verhulst, 1995; Visser, van der Ende, Koot, & Verhulst, 2000; Wiznitzer, Verhulst, van den Brink, Koeter, van der Ende, Giel et al., 1992). Items included in the anxiety/depression subscale are provided in Appendix C, Table C1. Delusional ideation During the 21-year follow-up, young adults were asked to circle one response (1=No; 2=Yes) to items contained within the 21-item Peters’ Delusional Inventory (PDI) (Peters & Garety, 1996), an instrument devised to measure delusional ideation among normal populations (Peters, Joseph, Day, & Garety, 2004). The PDI has been used previously in various studies (Laroi & Van der Linden, 2005; Laroi, Van der Linden, DeFruyt, van Os, & Aleman, 2006; Lopez-Ilundain, Perez-Nievas, Otero, & Mata, 2006; Lundberg, Cantor-Graae, Kabakyenga, Rukundo, & Ostergren, 2005; Malosh, 2004; Peters, Day, McKenna et al., 1999; Verdoux, Maurice-Tison, Gay, Van Os, Salamon, & Bourgeois, 1998; Verdoux, van Os, Maurice-Tison, Gay, Salamon, & Bourgeois, 1998). PDI items were recoded (0=No; 1=Yes). A principal components analysis was conducted on the PDI items using the Varimax rotation method with Kaiser normalisation, yielding four main factors which were classified as: 108 disturbed ideation; suspiciousness (or paranoid ideation); paranormal/grandiose ideation; and religious ideation (see Table 3 below). This analysis was based on all the young adult study participants who had never been diagnosed by a doctor as having schizophrenia. Table 3: Results of principal components analysis on 21 items from PDI Components PDI 21 items 1 2 3 4 (Variance explained) 20.3% 8.4% 6.3% 5.6% Disturbed Thoughts feel alien .618 Thoughts echoed back .617 Thoughts so vivid worried people can hear them .572 Robot or zombie without own will .529 Conspiracy against you .474 .407 World about to end .461 No thoughts in head at all .456 Suspiciousness (or paranoia) People drop hints and say things with double meaning .624 People not what they seem to be .579 Worried that partner may be unfaithful .560 Feel persecuted in some way .488 Have sinned more than the average person .461 Looked at oddly because of appearance .442 Paranormal (and grandiosity) People can communicate telepathically .701 Believe in witchcraft voodoo or occult .624 Very special or unusual .541 Destined to be important .529 Religious Especially close to God .854 Chosen by God .847 Single items included in total PDI scores only Magazines and TV especially for you Electrical devices can influence thoughts The Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin measure of sampling adequacy was 0.84, and the Bartlett test of sphericity was 12,114 (P = < 0.001), indicating that the assumptions for performing a principal components analysis were fulfilled. The four factors explained 40.64 per cent of the variance in PDI scores. The loading cut-off chosen for inclusion of items with a given factor 109 was set at 0.440. Thus, the item “conspiracy against you” was excluded from factor 2 (suspiciousness and paranoid ideation) and included in factor 1 only (disturbed ideation). Standardised alpha coefficients for the four factors and the total PDI scores indicate that they have moderate reliability (Disturbed, 0.68; Suspiciousness, 0.62; Paranormal/Grandiosity), 0.59; Religious, 0.79; Total PDI, 0.80). Interestingly, items normally associated with grandiose ideation clustered with items measuring paranormal beliefs. Factors yielded from the PDI vary considerably across studies. For example, the principal components analysis of the PDI conducted by Verdoux and colleagues (1998) yielded seven factors, with the two grandiosity items (destined to be very important, and being special and unusual) loading together, but separately from items measuring paranormal beliefs (telepathic communication, and power of witchcraft, voodoo, and the occult). Scores for items from each of these four factors were summed, yielding a total score for each factor. Scores for each of the 21 items were also summed in order to gain a total PDI score (including the two items shown in Table 3 that did not load with any of the four main factors). Subsequently, 10% cut-offs were determined from scores for each of the factors derived from this analysis, as well as for total PDI scores. Those scoring in the upper decile of delusional ideation scores were assigned a value of 2 (Disturbed = scores of 3 and above; Suspiciousness = scores of 4 and above; Paranormal/Grandiosity = scores of 3 and above; Religious= 2; Total PDI = scores of 10 and above) and the remainder a value of 1 for each of the four factors and total PDI scores. Those respondents who reported that they had doctor- diagnosed schizophrenia (n=27) were excluded from all analyses related to delusional ideation, since endorsement of PDI items by this group would be directly related to their condition. Antisocial behaviour Antisocial behaviour was assessed according to young adult responses to 28 items contained in Achenbach’s (1997) YASR externalising scale, measuring symptoms of intrusive, aggressive, and delinquent behaviour (standardized alpha coefficient = 0.86) (scoring methods are identical as those used for the anxiety/depression subscale). Achenbach’s gender cut-offs for the borderline threshold of clinical level externalising behaviour were used to categorise young adult females and males as being either normal or a “case”. The mean score for externalising behaviour was found to be slightly higher for the MUSP sample than that found among Achenbach’s normative samples (Females = 8.9 versus 7.5; Males = 10.1 versus 9.1). The individual items from the externalising scale are shown in Appendix C, Table C2. 110 Control variables A list of potential confounders was devised following examination of the empirical literature for factors that could be related to both the explanatory variables measuring young adult religiosity and the outcomes anxiety/depression, delusional ideation, and externalising behaviour. The analytical methods used are those recommended by McNamee (2006). Regression analyses were undertaken as a preliminary step to determine whether any significant associations existed (significance level set at P = <0.05) between the factors identified as potential confounders and (a) the explanatory variables and (b) the outcome variables. Only those variables that were found to be significantly related to both the explanatory variable and the outcome variable were entered into multivariable logistic regression models to determine any effects that might be attributable to them. Three factors were identified as being possible mediators or confounders, including alcohol use, cannabis use, and substance use (other than cannabis), since these variables are the only factors in the list of potential confounders that might be directly involved in the causal pathway between the explanatory and outcome variables under examination (for discussion about confounders versus mediators see Christenfeld, Sloan, Carroll, & Greenland, 2004). Discussion about whether these three factors served to confound or mediate observed associations between young adult religiosity and the outcomes anxiety/depression and delusional ideation is provided in the interpretation of results in Chapter Six. The three substance use variables were not used in the externalising analyses, since alcohol and drug use are tapped by items contained in the externalising scale. In regard to delusional ideation, for which analyses were run for the whole sample rather than separate analyses being performed for each gender, regression analyses were undertaken to determine whether there were any gender differences in the proportion of those scoring in the upper decile of scores for each of the four domains of delusional ideation, as well as total PDI scores. Only paranormal/grandiose ideation was found to be significantly higher among females than males and thus analyses related to this form of ideation were adjusted for gender. Examples of the results from preliminary analyses undertaken to identify potential confounders are included in the appendices, with the appendix that corresponds to particular results being identified where relevant, in the results sections in Chapter Six. The measures used for potential confounder variables are outlined below. 111 Young adult age Age at the time of the 21-year follow-up was calculated from date of birth and date of completion of questionnaires information that young adults provided on their questionnaires. Any missing date of birth data was obtained from medical records at the time of the young adult’s delivery at the study hospital, to ensure that there were no missing values for this variable. Young adult education The young adults were asked at the time of the 21-year follow-up “What is the highest level of education you have completed?” (1=Primary school; 2=Started secondary school; 3=Completed secondary school; 4=College eg. Business, Trade, Secretarial, Teachers; 5=TAFE; 6=University; 7=Other). Items were recoded into two categories (1=Non-tertiary; 2=Tertiary), with the tertiary category including all those who had completed some form of tertiary studies at a college, TAFE or university. Alcohol use Young adults were asked two questions during the 21-year follow-up about the frequency and level of their alcohol consumption: “How often do you drink alcohol?” (1=Never drink; 2=Daily; 3=A few times a week; 4=A few times a month; 5=A few times a year; 6=Rarely); and, “How much alcohol do you usually drink at those times?” (1=Never Drink; 2=Less than one glass; 3=One or two glasses; 4=Three or four glasses; 5=Five or six glasses; 6=Seven or more glasses). The frequency item was recoded so that values corresponded to the lowest frequency of drinking, from never drinking (value 1) to the highest frequency of drinking (“daily” – value of 6). The values for each of these two items were multiplied together. Those young adults whose scores represented consumption of alcohol at a rate of 7 glasses of alcohol per week or less were assigned a value of one, and those whose scores represented consumption of more than 7 glasses of alcohol per week were assigned a value of two (1= Abstainer, Light to Moderate drinker; 2 = Heavy drinker). Cannabis use A single item contained in the 21-year follow-up questionnaire was used to measure cannabis use among the young adult sample. Respondents were asked the question “In the last month, how often did you use cannabis, marijuana, pot, etc?” (1=Have never used; 2=Every day; 3=Every few days; 4=Once or so; 5=Not in the last month). Responses were recoded into two categories to reflect high cannabis use (1= No, including “Never”, “once or so”, “not in 112 the last month”; and 2=Yes, including use both “every day” and “every few days”). Substance use A new variable was created from responses to a series of items that followed the lead-in question “In the last 12 months how often have you used the following?”: amphetamines like speed, uppers, or pep pills; ecstasy or other designer drugs; inhalants like glue, paint, petrol, amyl nitrate, nitrous oxide (“bulbs”); cocaine; heroin; hallucinogens like acid, LSD or magic mushrooms (1=Never used; 2= Not used in the past year; 3=A few times during the year; 4=A few times a month; 5=A few times a week). Those who selected the responses 1 or 2 for all of these items were categorised as “never used/not in the past year” (value of 1) and the remainder of the sample who responded to any one of these items with a response representing a value of 3 or greater were categorised as “used in the past year” (value of 2). Thus, “use in the past year” captures use of one or more of these substances within the 12 months prior to survey. Maternal age Maternal date of birth data was accessed from obstetric records, from which maternal age at the time of delivery of the study child was calculated. Values were coded into three categories (1=13 to 19 years; 2=20 to 34 years; 3=35 years and over). Maternal education Mothers were asked “At what level did you complete your education?” at their first clinic visit during pregnancy (1=Opportunity school; 2=Primary school; 3=Started secondary school; 4=Complete grade 10; 5=Completed grade 12; 6=College [eg. Business, Trade, Secretarial, Teachers’]; 7=University; 8=Other). Responses were recoded into three categories such that the lowest value represents low educational level and high values represent higher educational level (1=Incomplete high school; 2=Completed high school; 3= Completed post-high school studies). Parental race A variable was created that considered race of both mother and father. Responses to two items asking which group the study mother and which group her partner belonged (Australian Aborigine=1; Maori/Islander=2; Asian=3, White=4; Other [please specify]=5) were recoded into two categories, White (1=Both parents White) and non-White (2=Mother or father non-White). 113 Family income in adolescence Mothers were asked the level of their total family income in survey forms administered during the 14-year follow-up, and were given a range of 7 income options ranging from between $0 to $10,399 and $36,500 or more per annum. Responses were recoded into three categories (1=up to $20,799; 2=$20,800 to $36,349, 3=$36,500 and more). This variable was used as an indicator of socioeconomic status in the adolescent/pre-adulthood period. It was decided that this measure better reflected the socioeconomic circumstances of the young adults than young adult income, since 22.9 per cent of the study sample were engaged in full- time studies and 11.9 per cent were studying part-time. Full-time students would necessarily have low incomes, but may also have additional financial support from parents that is unlikely to be captured by measures of their own income. Therefore, young adult income could be a poor indicator of either available financial resources or socioeconomic status. Parents together in young adulthood Mothers were asked about their marital status at all seven phases of the study from pregnancy to 21 years post-delivery. At the 21-year follow-up, mothers were also asked “Have you ever been divorced”. Marital status data across the various phases of the study, as well as responses to this item were used to create a variable (1=Parents not together at 21; 2=Parents together at 21) that distinguishes those mothers who were never divorced, and remained married or in a defacto relationship across all phases of the study from those who had been separated, divorced, or widowed at any stage during the period of the young adult’s life from the prenatal period to young adulthood. Since a proportion of the mothers of those young adults in the study sample did not participate in the 21-year follow-up, these mothers were assigned a value of 1. This decision was based on recognition that non-response among these mothers was largely due to factors such as the mother being deceased, mother having moved away from their offspring (interstate or overseas) and family breakdown or conflict – factors that made it more likely than not, that the vast majority of this group had parents who were no longer together at the time of the 21-year follow-up. Quality of neighbourhood Young adults were asked the question “How much are the following a problem in the area where you live?”, with the list of possible problems including: vandalism/graffiti; house burglaries; car stealing; drug abuse; violence in the streets; unemployment; noisy and/or reckless driving; alcohol abuse; and school truancy (“wagging school”) (1=Don’t know; 2=No problem; 3=Small problem; 4=Moderate problem; 5=Major problem). Scores for these items were 114 summed, with the upper decile of scores being categorised as “High level of problems” (value of 2) and the remainder of scores being assigned to the category “Normal” (value of 1). Behaviour problems in adolescence During the 14-year follow-up, the young adults (then adolescents) were administered the Youth Self Report (YSR) (Achenbach, 1991), a 119-item instrument asking participants to circle the response “Which best describes your behaviour in the last six months?” (Often=1; Sometimes=2; Never/rarely=3). These items were recoded in line with the methods outlined by Achenbach (0=Never/rarely, 1= Sometimes, and 2=Often) for each of the subscales anxiety/depression (16 items; Cronbach alpha=0.84), thought problems (7 items; Cronbach alpha=0.69), and externalising behaviour (30 items; Cronbach alpha=0.87). “Caseness” was determined according to the gender cut-offs devised by Achenbach (1991), based on normative samples. A variable was created categorising females and males as “Non-case” = 1 and “Case” = 2, according to these gender cut-offs. The use of Achenbach’s YSR provides the advantage of a uniform approach to symptomatology of both anxiety/depression and externalising problems, for the purposes of controlling for problems in adolescence when investigating these same outcomes in young adulthood. While Achenbach’s thought problem subscale does not correspond with the PDI, it assesses thought disturbance and three of the items in this subscale directly tap either hallucinatory experiences (“hear sounds or voices that other people don’t hear” and “see things that other people don’t think are there”) or disturbed ideation (“have thoughts are people think are strange”). For individual items from the anxiety/depression subscale, thought subscale, and externalising scale see Appendix D. Missing values Since the study sample has been restricted to those participants for whom complete data was available for the main explanatory and outcome variables, as well as anxiety/depression, thought problems and externalising behaviour in adolescence, missing data was restricted to a number of variables identified as potential confounders. Decisions about missing values have already been identified for the variable “parents together in adulthood”, but missing data for all other potential confounder variables were assigned mean values (young adult education, alcohol consumption, cannabis use, maternal education, race, and family income). Missing data was found to be minimal for all variables, with the exception of race and family income in adolescence, and even in these cases missing data represents a very small proportion of the total sample (0.02%). Nevertheless, sensitivity analyses were conducted to ensure that missing data has not biased any estimates, with the results of these analyses being reported in each of 115 the main sections of the results chapter (Chapter Six). Statistical analyses Young adult religiosity and religious background Crosstabulations were used and chi squares tests performed for analyses related to the prevalence of young adult R/S beliefs, church attendance, and religious practices. For analyses examining relationships between young adult religiosity and religious background, crude odds ratios were yielded from multinomial logistic regression models. Adjustments for possible confounding were made where significant associations were found between the explanatory and outcome variables. Potential confounders included in these multivariable models were those indicated by the preliminary regression analyses as being significantly associated with both the explanatory and outcome variables being examined (see Appendix E). The eight- category religious affiliation variable was used for this set of analyses. Young adult anxiety/depression, delusional ideation and antisocial behaviour The same analytic approach was taken for all analyses related to young adult anxiety/depression, delusional ideation, and externalising behaviour. Univariate logistic regression models were used to determine associations between all the explanatory and outcome variables under examination. If positive or negative associations at a statistical significance level of P = < 0.05 were found, multivariable logistic regressions were performed including those variables identified from the preliminary linear regression analyses as being potential confounders (see examples in Appendix F, G, and H). These analyses were repeated with the exclusion of all those young adults who had borderline problems in adolescence to determine the extent that pre-existing anxiety/depression, thought problems, and externalising behaviour in adolescence might confound any significant associations observed for young adult anxiety/depression, delusional ideation, and externalising behaviour respectively. Finally, additional multivariable logistic regression models were performed to test the independent contribution of traditional and non-traditional R/S beliefs, frequency of church attendance, and maternal belief in God, frequency of church attendance, and religious affiliation to the outcomes of interest, in instances where two or more of these variables were found to be significantly associated with the same outcome. Significance levels were set at P = < 0.05 for all analyses. The anxiety/depression and externalising analyses were conducted separately for females and males, while the delusional ideation analyses were undertaken on the young adult sample as a whole. The five-category religious affiliation variable was used for the analyses related to 116 anxiety/depression and externalising behaviour (separated by gender), and the seven-category religious affiliation variable was used for the delusional ideation analyses (based on the whole sample). All analyses were performed using SPSS Version 13.0 for Windows. Attrition Loss to follow-up of the young adult sample at 21 years post-delivery was found to differ according to socio-demographics, religious characteristics and the mental health of their mothers when they were enrolled in the study, at their first obstetric visit at the study hospital. Table 4 below identifies the percentages of the original birth cohort (N = 7,223) lost to follow-up at the time of 21-year follow-up according to maternal socio-demographics and mental health. Attrition rates were yielded from cross-tabulations, with Pearson’s chi-square tests being performed to determine the statistical significance of differences observed between groups for each factor listed in the table. Young adults disproportionately lost to follow-up are those offspring whose mothers were of younger age, had low income, had not completed high school, were unmarried, had a non-white racial background, or who were anxious, depressed, stressed or had a relationship with their partner characterised by conflict at entry to the study. Attrition rates for the previous phase of the study are also identified on the right-hand side of Table 4 and show that the same characteristics that predicted loss to follow-up during the most recent wave of data collection also predicted loss to follow-up at 14 years post-delivery. The only exception to this pattern is in regard to stress, which was not significantly associated with attrition at 14 years, but is strongly associated with attrition at 21 years post-delivery. 117 Table 4: Maternal characteristics associated with loss to follow-up of the study children at 21 and 14 years post-delivery Attrition rates for the MUSP sample of young adults Loss to follow-up at Loss to follow-up 21-year follow-up at 14 year-follow-up Maternal factors at entry to the % of group % of group n P value P value study (prenatal period) lost lost Age 13-19 yrs 1181 58.3 39.0 20-34 yrs 5723 45.7 26.3 35 yrs + 319 44.8 < 0.001 26.0 < 0.001 High school education Incomplete 1305 54.1 33.6 Complete 4609 47.9 28.0 Post-high 1256 40.2 < 0.001 24.4 < 0.001 Marital status Single 736 60.6 40.5 Living together 844 60.3 42.5 Married 5386 43.3 23.8 Separated, divorced or widowed 194 62.9 < 0.001 46.4 < 0.001 Family income Less than $10,400 2308 54.1 36.0 $10,400 and over 4441 43.3 < 0.001 23.1 < 0.001 Race White 6259 45.8 26.7 Asian 307 55.7 38.1 Other 444 68.0 < 0.001 46.6 < 0.001 a Depression Non-depressed 6673 46.6 27.6 Depressed 412 61.9 < 0.001 40.0 < 0.001 a Anxiety Non-anxious 6163 45.9 26.9 Anxious 926 58.9 < 0.001 37.1 < 0.001 b Stress Non-stressed 6475 46.9 28.3 Stressed 611 53.7 0.001 28.0 0.454 c Dyadic adjustment Good adjustment 6615 46.3 27.0 Conflict 202 55.0 0.009 42.1 < 0.001 a: Depression and anxiety were assessed from scores of 4 or higher on a seven-item depression scale and a seven-item anxiety scale from the Delusion Symptom States Inventory (Bedford & Foulds, 1977). b: Stress was assessed from scores of 4 or higher on 4-item scale measuring mental and emotional stress, and nervous and physical exhaustion. c: Dyadic adjustment was assessed from an eight-item shortened version of the Spanier Dyadic Adjustment Scale (Spanier, 1976). The same methods of analysis were used to determine attrition rates among the study children according to maternal religiosity. From Table 5, it can be seen that loss to follow-up 118 at 21-years post-delivery was lowest for offspring of mothers who believed in God and those who attended church on a weekly basis at entry to the study. In regard to maternal religious affiliation, offspring attrition rates at 21 years post-delivery are fairly similar across the four largest religious groups: Catholics (46.6%), Anglicans (48.6%), other Christian (45.0%), and no religion (48.1%). The two groups that are under-represented in the current sample are offspring of mothers who reported being affiliated with a non-Christian religion (attrition rate 71.6%) and to a lesser extent, those who refused to answer the religion item at entry to the study (attrition rate 57.5%). Two groups that are over-represented in the study sample when compared to others, include offspring of mothers affiliated with one of the Pentecostal churches (attrition rate 40.0%) and those who did not define which religion they were affiliated with (attrition rate 41.9%). Even though the differences in attrition rates across the eight groups are highly significant, it needs to be noted that the four groups with the highest attrition rates (non-defined religion, non-Christians, and refused to answer groups) represent in total just nine per cent of the entire cohort at commencement to the study. The patterns of offspring attrition at 21-years post-delivery are similar without exception to those observed for the 14-year follow-up. Table 5: Maternal religiosity and loss to follow-up of the study children at 21 and 14 years post-delivery Attrition rates for the MUSP young adult sample Loss to follow-up at Loss to follow-up Maternal religiosity 21-year follow-up at 14 year-follow-up at entry to the study % of group % of group n P value P value (prenatal period) lost lost Belief in God No 343 55.4 35.0 Unsure 1219 51.0 31.5 Yes 3742 46.4 < 0.001 27.2 < 0.001 Church attendance Never 4357 49.6 30.3 Monthly or less 301 46.5 26.9 Weekly 1053 41.3 < 0.001 22.2 < 0.001 Religious affiliation Catholic 2020 46.6 26.7 Anglican 2130 48.6 29.2 Other Christian 1429 45.0 24.8 Pentecostal 155 40.0 21.3 Non-Christian 95 71.6 55.8 Not defined 86 41.9 29.1 Refused to answer 181 57.5 32.1 No religion 315 48.1 < 0.001 32.5 < 0.001 119 Since maternal religiosity is a focus of investigation for its connection to young adult religiosity, and to young adult anxiety/depression, delusional ideation, and externalising behaviour, attrition rates related to maternal religiosity require due consideration. However, as already noted, attrition rates are similar across the four largest religious affiliation groups under examination, and offspring of mothers who reported being affiliated with a Pentecostal church have the lowest attrition rate of all groups. Estimates for the non-Christian group are likely to be biased since this group has the highest attrition rate, but the only analyses that examine this group as a distinct category are those that investigate links between religious affiliation and young adult religiosity. Thus, no estimates have been computed for this group in relation to mental health or social behaviour. Differences in attrition rates between the no religion group (48.1%), the Church of England (48.6%) and Catholicism (46.6%) are small, and it is these three groups that form the main focus of attention in the analyses examining young adult anxiety/depression and externalising behaviour. The reference groups for the analyses related to maternal belief in God and church attendance are the no belief and no church attendance groups. While there could be concerns that these same groups have been disproportionately lost to follow-up, it is also the case that social and economic disadvantage predicts attrition. Since socioeconomic disadvantage is linked to poor mental health and behaviour, those retained in the study are likely to have less mental health impairment and aberrant behaviour than could be expected if there had been less attrition among the socially disadvantaged. A number of the potential confounders identified and tested for their connection to the main explanatory and outcome variables tap social disadvantage (maternal age and education in the prenatal period, income in adolescence, race, parental divorce, separation and death, and quality of neighbourhood). Thus, an assessment can be made of the extent that higher attrition of the socially disadvantaged might bias the results from any change of effects that take place after adjustment for these factors. Nevertheless, this study cannot eliminate effects from attrition bias altogether. It is also worth noting that Ware and colleagues (2006) investigated MUSP attrition rates over time and found that only 4.0 per cent of the birth cohort had never responded post- baseline up to the time of the 14-year follow-up, and that 61.9 per cent had responded at each phase, 9.9 per cent had participated in one or more follow-ups after the first two phases (“returners”), and 24.2 per cent had only participated in either the 6-month or 5-year follow- ups or both (“leavers”). The latter group includes those who were unable to be located, as well as non-responders, and therefore does not represent complete withdrawal from the study. 120 Ware et al. (2006) found that the base-line characteristics of these “leavers” were similar to those of “returners” to the study. 121 Chapter Six: Results This chapter outlines the findings from the current study in four separate sections. The first section provides an overview of young adult religiosity, identifying the prevalence of traditional and non-traditional R/S beliefs, frequency of church attendance, and frequency of engagement in religious practices or rituals among the study sample. Relationships found between young adult religiosity and religious background are also reported. These findings provide context to the results reported in Sections Two, Three and Four by providing an indication of the extent that religious background is linked to R/S beliefs and church attendance in young adulthood. Section Two outlines the results of analyses investigating associations between traditional and non-traditional beliefs, church attendance, and religious background, and young adult anxiety/depression. Sections Three and Four identify associations found between these same influences and young adult delusional ideation and externalising behaviour (intrusiveness, aggression and delinquency) respectively. Section One: Overview of young adult religiosity and religious background The following results reflect the findings based on the total sample of young adults who participated in the 21-year follow-up (N=3,777). Due to differences in non-response to individual items, there are slight variations in the total sample size reported for each of the tables in this section. Numbers of missing are reported at the bottom of each table. Young adult religiosity Traditional and non-traditional beliefs The pattern of traditional R/S beliefs observed among the young adult sample under study is shown in Table 6. Almost half of the sample maintains some ties with traditional religion as indicated by endorsement of a belief in God (47.9%) while around a quarter (24.3%) reject this belief. The prevalence of a belief in God is somewhat higher for females than it is for males (49.5% versus 46.2%), and more males reject this belief than do females (27.8% versus 21.1%). More females than males are unsure if they believe in God (29.4% versus 26.0%). These gender differences are highly significant. 122 Table 6: Belief in God among the study sample Belief in God in young adulthood Total sample Females Males Response N = 3740 n = 1979 n = 1761 % % % No 24.3 21.1 27.8 Do not know 27.8 29.4 26.0 Yes 47.9 49.5 46.2 Total 100 100 100 Gender differences: X2 = 22.79; df = 2; P = < 0.001 Missing n = 37 Table 7 below shows that non-traditional R/S beliefs are not as common as traditional R/S beliefs among the young adult sample, with around one quarter (24.5%) reporting that they believe in a spiritual or higher power other than God and a similar proportion stating that they are unsure whether they endorse this belief (25.3%). Around half of the sample report that they reject this belief, and males are significantly more likely to reject non-traditional R/S beliefs than females (57% versus 44.2%). Around one-fifth of males agree that they believe in a spiritual or higher power other than God, while nearly one-third of females do likewise. Table 7: Belief in a spiritual or higher power other than God among the study sample Belief in a spiritual or higher power other than God in young adulthood Total sample Females Males Response N = 3739 n = 1977 n = 1762 % % % No 50.2 44.2 57.0 Do not know 25.3 26.8 23.5 Yes 24.5 29.0 19.5 Total 100 100 100 Gender differences: X2 =68.98; df = 2; P = < 0.001 Missing n = 38 In order to identify the pattern of R/S beliefs that emerge when traditional and non- traditional are considered simultaneously, Table 8 shows that 15 per cent of the young adults reject both beliefs, 15.2 per cent are unsure about each of these beliefs, and 9.4 per cent endorse both beliefs. A total of 37.6 per cent of the sample endorses one belief but rejects the other (30.9% believe in God only and reject a spiritual or higher power, and 6.7% do the opposite). The remainder of the sample’s beliefs involve some other configuration of being unsure of at least one of these beliefs (22.8% in total). 123 Table 8: Pattern of traditional and non-traditional beliefs among the study sample Traditional and non-traditional religious/spiritual beliefs in young adulthood Belief in God Belief in a spiritual or higher N=3735 power % No No 15.0 No Unsure 2.5 No Yes 6.7 Unsure No 4.3 Unsure Unsure 15.2 Unsure Yes 8.4 Yes No 30.9 Yes Unsure 7.6 Yes Yes 9.4 100 Belief differences: X2 =872.37; df = 4; P = < 0.001 Missing n = 42 Church attendance In regard to participation in church services, it can be seen from Table 9 that around three-quarters (76.5%) of the young adults under study never attend church services, and less than one tenth (8.0%) attend church on a weekly basis. In total, 23.5 per cent of the sample report that they attend church (less than monthly: 13.3%; monthly: 2.2%; weekly: 8.0%), similar to national estimates in 2001 that 23 per cent of Australians aged 18 years and over, attended church in the three months prior to survey (ABS, 2004a). No significant gender differences were found for frequency of church attendance among the young adult sample. Table 9: Young adult church attendance according to gender Church attendance in young adulthood Total sample Females Males (N = 3757) (n = 1982) (n = 1775) Frequency % % % Never 76.5 76.5 76.4 Less than once a month 13.3 13.1 13.6 Monthly 2.2 1.8 2.6 Weekly 8.0 8.6 7.3 Total 100 100 100 2 Gender differences X = 5.55; df = 3; P = 0.14 Missing n = 20 124 Religious/spiritual beliefs and church attendance The extent that non-traditional R/S beliefs differ according to whether or not young adults believe in God or attend church services is highlighted in Table 10. A significantly higher proportion of young adults who believe in God and attend church services reject belief in a spiritual or higher power other than God (77%) than those who believe in God and do not participate in church services (54.8%). Similarly, among believers in God, those who report never attending church are significantly more likely to be unsure whether they believe in a spiritual or higher power (20.6%) than those who attend church (9.8%), and to endorse non-traditional beliefs (24.6% versus 13.2%). Differences between church attenders and non-attenders are far less pronounced (and are not statistically significant) when considering the group who are unsure whether they believe in God, with there being only a 2 per cent difference approximately between church attenders and non-attenders in regard to rejecting non-traditional beliefs (17.1% versus 15.3%), being unsure (51.2% versus 54.8%), or endorsing these beliefs (31.7% versus 30.0%). The observed differences between church attenders and non-attenders who reject God but believe in a spiritual or higher power are weakly significant. Church attenders who reject God are slightly more likely to endorse non-traditional R/S beliefs (31.3%) than non- churchgoers who reject God (27.5%). Table 10: Young adult traditional and non-traditional beliefs according to church attendance Belief in God Belief in n No Unsure Yes spiritual Attends church Attends church Attends church or higher No Yes No Yes No Yes power (n=890) (n=16) (n=957) (n=82) (n=1008) (n=782) % % % % % % No 1875 62.1 50.0 15.3 17.1 54.8 77.0 Unsure 946 10.3 18.8 54.8 51.2 20.6 9.8 Yes 914 27.5 31.3 30.0 31.7 24.6 13.2 Total 3735 100 100 100 100 100 100 No belief in God: X2 =1.515; df = 2; P = 0.47 Unsure of belief in God: X2 =0.409; df = 2; P = 0.81 Believes in God: X2 = 95.265; df = 2; P = < 0.001 Missing n = 42 Engagement in religious activities such as prayer and other rituals Results of crosstabulations performed to determine the extent of engagement in religious activities such as prayer and religious rituals among those who never attend church 125 compared to those who do are shown in Table 11. A much higher proportion of churchgoers engage in these types of activities than those who never attend church services. A total of 17.6 per cent of those who never attend church services report that they engage in prayer, rituals, or other religious activities on either a daily, weekly, monthly, or less frequent basis, in contrast to the high percentage of those who attend church and report engaging in these kinds of activities (92% in total). Nearly one third of churchgoers (29.9%), but only a small percentage of non-churchgoers (2.1%), report that they engage in some form of religious activity on a daily basis. Table 11: Young adult prayer, religious rituals or other religious activities according to church attendance Young adult church attendance Frequency of Total sample No church Attends church religious activities (N = 3751) (n = 2867) (n = 884) % % % Never 64.8 82.4 8.0 Less than once a 15.8 10.0 34.3 month Monthly 4.1 2.2 10.5 Weekly 6.6 3.3 17.2 Daily 8.7 2.1 29.9 Total 100 100 100 2 Differences in religious practices X = 1741.16; df = 4; P = < 0.001 Missing n = 26 Summary of findings on religiosity among young adults Overall, the results show that the majority of young adults maintain some sort of R/S belief. Given that less than one quarter of the total sample ever attend church, it is clear that religiosity among the sample is more privatised than institutionalised in nature. It is also clear that a traditional religious belief in God is more common than non-traditional beliefs among those who do not participate in religious services. A greater proportion of non-churchgoers than churchgoers also report that they endorse both traditional and non-traditional R/S beliefs. Not surprisingly, prayer, religious rituals, or other religious activities are far more common among churchgoers than those who never attend religious services. However, it remains that nearly one fifth of those who never attend church also engage in these sorts of activities. 126 Religious background and young adult religiosity The following findings show the extent that endorsement of R/S beliefs and church attendance in young adulthood is related to the religious environment in which the child is raised in their early years, assessed by maternal belief in God, frequency of maternal church attendance, and maternal religious affiliation. Crude and adjusted odds ratios and confidence intervals yielded from multinomial logistic regression analyses are reported, with values being shown at the level of two decimal points. In instances where the yielded odds ratios are 10 or greater, the odds ratios and upper confidence intervals are reported at the level of one decimal point only. Potential confounders identified for associations between the dimensions of religious background and young adult religiosity are provided in Appendix E (Tables E1, E2 and E3). Maternal belief in God The results of the multinomial logistic regression analysis performed to determine the extent that maternal belief in God is connected to this same belief among their offspring in young adulthood is shown in Table 12. Young adults who believe in God are four times more likely than those who reject this belief to be offspring of a mother who believed in God at entry to the study. Offspring who are unsure if they believe in God are around one and a half times more likely than those who reject God to be offspring of a mother who believed in God during the prenatal period. There is little attenuation of effect after adjustment for potential confounders, young adult education, cannabis use, race, and parents remaining together until adulthood (Model 2). It is also noteworthy that the number of young adults who reported believing in God at the time of the 21-year follow-up between 2001 and 2004, represents 47.9 per cent of the young adult sample, whereas 80 per cent (n=2,965) of the young adults’ mothers (N = 3705) believed in God approximately two decades earlier. 127 Table 12: Maternal belief in God and traditional beliefs in young adulthood Young adult belief in God Maternal n No Unsure Yes belief in (n=901) (n=1028) (n=1776) God Model 1 Model 2 Model 1 Model 2 % OR % Unadj OR Adj OR % Unadj OR Adj OR (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) No /unsure 740 39.6 1 34.6 1 1 25.8 1 1 Yes 2965 20.5 1 26.0 1.45*** 1.43*** 53.5 4.00*** 3.88*** (1.19,1.77) (1.17,1.74) (3.26,4.91) (3.15,4.76) Total 3705 24.3 27.7 47.9 Reference groups: no belief ***P = < 0.001 Model 2: Adjusted for young adult education, cannabis use, maternal age, race, and parents remaining together until young adulthood Missing n = 72 A completely different pattern emerges when considering the link between maternal belief in God and non-traditional R/S beliefs in young adulthood. Table 13 shows that young adults who believe in a spiritual or higher power are significantly less likely than those who reject this belief to be offspring of mothers who believed in God at entry to the study. The significance of this association changes from strong to moderate after adjustment for potential confounders, cannabis use, and parents remaining together in young adulthood (Model 2). However, young adults who are unsure whether or not they believe in a spiritual or higher power other than God are just as likely as those who reject this belief to be offspring of mothers who believed in God at entry to the study. 128 Table 13: Maternal belief in God and non-traditional beliefs in young adulthood Young adult belief in a spiritual or power other than God Maternal No Unsure Yes belief in (n=1860) (n=937) (n=907) God Model 1 Model 2 Model 1 Model 2 % OR % Unadj OR Adj OR % Unadj OR Adj OR (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) No /unsure 742 44.7 1 25.9 1 1 29.4 1 1 Yes 2962 51.6 1 25.2 0.84 0.85 23.3 0.69*** 0.71** (0.69,1.03) (0.69,1.03) (0.57,0.83) (0.58,0.86) Total 3704 50.2 25.3 24.5 Reference groups: no belief **P = < 0.01 ***P = < 0.001 Model 2: Adjusted for cannabis use, and parents remaining together in young adulthood Missing n = 73 Young adult participation in religious services is strongly related to maternal belief in God, as shown in Table 14. Those who attend church on an irregular basis are four times more likely than non-attenders to be offspring of a mother who believed in God at entry to the study, and those who attend church on a weekly basis are over six times more likely than non-attenders to be offspring of mothers who believed in God during the prenatal period. There is slight reduction in the odds ratios after adjustment for potential confounders (Model 2). It is needs to borne in mind however, that the overall church attendance rate among the young adult sample is 23.5 per cent and that these odds ratios are based on young adults who never attend church and mothers who didn’t believe in God at entry to the study (or were unsure). It thus worth noting than that 72.5 per cent of all offspring of mothers who believed in God, never attend church. 129 Table 14: Maternal belief in God and church attendance in young adulthood Young adult church attendance Maternal Never Monthly or less Weekly belief in (n=2848) (n=576) (n=298) God Model 1 Model 2 Model 1 Model 2 Adj % OR % Unadj OR Adj OR % Unadj OR OR (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) No /unsure 747 92.5 1 5.6 1 1 1.9 1 1 Yes 2975 72.5 1 17.9 4.07*** 3.85*** 9.5 6.50*** 5.98*** (2.94.5.64) (2.78,5.34) (3.77,11.2) (3.46,10.3) Total 3722 76.5 15.5 8.0 Reference groups: no church attendance and maternal no/unsure of believing in God ***P = < 0.001 Model 2: Adjusted for young adult education and cannabis use, maternal age and education, race, and parents remaining together until adulthood Missing n = 55 Maternal church attendance In regard to maternal church attendance measured at 5 years after the birth of the study child, results from the multinomial logistic regression analysis performed to determine its link to traditional R/S beliefs in young adulthood are shown below in Table 15. Those young adults who are unsure whether or not they believe in God are somewhat more likely than their non-believing counterparts to have a mother who attended church infrequently during their childhood, and twice as likely to have had a mother who attended church on a weekly basis at this early stage of their lives. A stronger effect is evident for young adults who believe in God, such that they are over two and a half times more likely than young adults who reject God to have a mother who attended church infrequently, and around 11 times more likely than the reference group to have a mother who attended church on a weekly basis. Adjustment for a range of potential confounders makes little difference to these associations (Model 2). A sensitivity analysis showed that the exclusion of young adults for whom maternal church attendance was measured at entry to the study (instead of five years post-delivery) made little difference to the associations reported in Table 15. 130 Table 15: Maternal church attendance during childhood and traditional beliefs in young adulthood Young adult belief in God Maternal No Unsure Yes church (n=906) (n=1040) (n=1790) attendance Model 1 Model 2 Model 1 Model 2 % OR % Unadj OR Adj OR % Unadj OR Adj OR (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) Never 2199 31.8 1 33.0 1 1 35.2 1 1 Monthly or less 849 19.1 1 25.7 1.30* 1.28* 55.2 2.62*** 2.56*** (1.03,1.63) (1.02,1.62) (2.13,3.22) (2.08, 3.15) Weekly 688 6.4 1 14.0 2.10*** 2.04*** 79.7 11.3*** 10.5*** (1.45,3.05) (1.40,2.97) (8.16,15.6) (7.60,14.6) Total 3736 24.3 27.8 47.9 Reference groups: no belief and maternal church attendance never * P = 0.05 ***P = < 0.001 Model 2: Adjusted for young adult education, alcohol and cannabis use, maternal age, race, and parents remaining together until young adulthood Missing n = 41 Table 16 indicates that both young adults who are unsure if they believe, or do believe, in a spiritual or higher power other than God are much less likely than those who reject these R/S beliefs to be offspring of mothers who were regular church attenders in their childhood years than non-attenders. However, maternal church attendance on an infrequent basis would seem to have little influence on whether or not young adults reject, endorse or are uncertain about believing in a spiritual or higher power other than God. Adjustment for potential confounders has little effect on these associations (Model 2). A sensitivity analysis revealed that the insignificant negative association between young adult belief in a spiritual or higher power and maternal church attendance at a frequency of monthly or less, became weakly significant (Adjusted OR = 0.81; 95%CI: 0.65,1.00) once the analysis was restricted to those young adults for whom maternal church attendance was measured during the prenatal period. No change of effect was observed for weekly maternal church attendance however. Thus, infrequent maternal church attendance measured at 5 years post-delivery appears to be weakly associated with a reduced likelihood of endorsement of non-traditional R/S beliefs in young adulthood. 131 Table 16: Maternal church attendance during childhood and non-traditional beliefs in young adulthood Young adult belief in a spiritual or higher power other than God Maternal No Unsure Yes church (n=1875) (n=944) (n=916) attendance Model 1 Model 2 Model 1 Model 2 % OR % Unadj OR Adj OR % Unadj OR Adj OR (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) Never 2197 45.0 1 28.6 1 1 26.4 1 1 Monthly or less 849 49.4 1 26.6 0.85 0.85 24.0 0.83 0.85 (0.70,1.03) (0.70,1.03) (0.68,1.01) (0.69,1.03) Weekly 689 67.8 1 13.1 0.30*** 0.30*** 19.2 0.48*** 0.51*** (0.24,0.39) (0.24,0.39) (0.39,0.60) (0.41,0.63) Total 3735 50.2 25.3 24.5 Reference groups: no belief and maternal church attendance never ***P = < 0.001 Model 2: Adjusted for young adult cannabis use and parents remaining together until adulthood Missing n = 42 The findings from the multinomial logistic regression analysis considering maternal church attendance at 5 years post-delivery and church attendance and non-attendance in young adulthood are provided in Table 17. Young adults who attend church on a weekly basis are nearly 40 times more likely than young adults who never attend church to have a mother who attended church at this same level of frequency when the young adult was a child. Young adults within this group are also more than twice as likely as their non-attending counterparts to have a mother who attended church on a monthly basis or less during their childhood. Even those young adults who attend church irregularly are nearly 10 times more likely than their non-attending counterparts to have a mother who attended church on a weekly basis, and nearly four times more likely than non-attenders to have a mother who attended church infrequently. Adjustment for potential confounders made little difference to these associations, except that the odds ratios for young adult weekly church attendance from weekly maternal church attendance reduced slightly (Adjusted OR = 37.0;95%CI: 25.8, 53.1). A sensitivity analysis revealed that the likelihood of weekly church attendance in young adulthood according to mothers attending church at this same frequency is underestimated if analysis is not restricted to offspring for whom this data was gathered at 5 years post-delivery. The odds ratios for young adult weekly church attendance for offspring of mothers who attended church on a weekly basis increased by 10 (Model 2: Adjusted OR=45.9; 95%CI: 132 30.4,69.4) once young adults for whom church attendance was measured in the prenatal period were excluded. Little difference was observed however for those young adults who attend church infrequently (monthly or less) and whose mothers attended church on a weekly basis (Model 2: Adjusted OR = 2.63; 95%CI: 1.56,4.46). Table 17: Maternal church attendance during childhood and young adult church attendance Young adult frequency of church attendance Maternal Never Monthly or less Weekly church attendance (n=2871) (n=581) (n=301) Model 1 Model 2 Model 1 Model 2 % OR % Unadj OR Adj OR % Unadj OR Adj OR (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) Never 2208 90.4 1 7.6 1 1 2.0 1 1 Monthly or less 852 72.4 1 23.8 3.93*** 3.80*** 3.8 2.35*** 2.20** (3.14,4.92) (3.03,4.76) (1.48,3.74) (1.38,3.53) Weekly 693 37.1 1 30.4 9.82*** 9.26*** 35.2 39.7*** 37.0*** (7.71,12.5) (7.25,11.8) (28.0,56.3) (25.8,53.1) Total 3753 76.5 15.5 8.0 Reference groups: young adult and maternal church attendance never **P = < 0.01 ***P = < 0.001 Model 2: Adjusted for young adult cannabis and alcohol use and education, maternal age and education, race, and parents remaining together until adulthood Missing n = 24 Maternal religious affiliation The findings reported in this section identify the relationships between maternal religious affiliation on young adult traditional and non-traditional R/S beliefs and churchgoing behaviour using the eight-category religious affiliation variable. The small numbers in the non- Christian and ill-defined religious affiliation categories led to some of the odds ratios yielded from the multinomial logistic regression analyses being statistically insignificant (with one of the cells having a count of less than five). Square parentheses are used in tables to identify these instances. Young adult belief in God was found to vary considerably according to maternal religious affiliation at entry to the study. Table 18 shows that young adults who endorse traditional R/S beliefs are nearly 14 times more likely than non-believers to be offspring of women affiliated with one of the Pentecostal churches at entry to the study, around three times more likely be offspring of women who were affiliated with a non-Christian religion or 133 Catholicism, and 1.6 times more likely to be offspring of women affiliated with the Church of England than they are to be offspring of mothers who were unaffiliated with a religion at entry to the study. Young adults who believe in God are nearly four times more likely than non-believers to be offspring of mothers who refused to answer the religious affiliation item at entry to the study. Most notable is that only 6.5 per cent of offspring of Pentecostal mothers reject a belief in God in adulthood. A different pattern emerges for those young adults who are uncertain if they believe in God. Comparing this group with their non-believing counterparts, only offspring of mothers affiliated with the Church of England, Catholicism, and Other Christian religions are significantly more likely to be uncertain about God. Adjustment for potential confounders (other substance use and parents remaining together until adulthood – not shown in Table 18) made little difference for any of the religious affiliation groups (for example, Pentecostal – Adjusted OR = 13.9: 95%CI: 5.89,32.8). Table 18: Maternal religious affiliation at entry to the study and traditional beliefs in young adulthood Young adult belief in God Maternal n No Unsure Yes religious affiliation (n=907) (n=1040) (n=1793) % Unadj % Unadj OR % Unadj OR OR (95%CI) (95%CI) No religion 510 36.5 1 30.4 1 33.1 1 Catholic 1062 19.6 1 25.8 1.58* 54.6 3.07*** (1.20,2.09) (2,36,3.99) Anglican 1083 27.3 1 32.9 1.44** 39.8 1.60*** (1.11,1.88) (1.24,2.07) Other Christian 783 21.6 1 24.5 1.36* 53.9 2.75*** (1.01,1.83) (2.09,3.61) Pentecostal 92 6.5 1 10.9 2.00 82.6 13.9*** (0.71,5.63) (5.92,32.8) Non-Christian 27 18.5 1 25.9 1.68 55.6 3.30* (0.52,5.40) (1.17,9.28) Not defined 50 28.0 1 28.0 1.20 44.0 1.73 (0.55,2.59) (0.86,3.49) Refused to answer 133 17.3 1 24.1 1.67 58.6 3.73*** (0.94,2.97) (2.24,6.21) Total 3740 24.3 27.8 47.9 Reference groups: no belief and no religious affiliation *P = < 0.05 **P = < 0.01 ***P = < 0.001 Missing n=37 134 Considering endorsement of non-traditional R/S in young adult and maternal religious background, Table 19 indicates that young adults who believe in a spiritual or higher power other than God are significantly less likely than non-believers to be offspring of mothers affiliated with Catholicism, other Christian religions, or Pentecostal churches. Of most interest is that having an Anglican mother appears to have no bearing on whether offspring reject or endorse non-traditional R/S beliefs once they reach adulthood. It is also noteworthy that those who are unsure whether or not they believe in a spiritual power, do not differ from those who reject these beliefs in regard to their mothers’ religious affiliation, with the exception of those raised by a mother affiliated with one of the Pentecostal churches or a Christian religion other than Catholicism or Church of England. Uncertainty about belief in a spiritual or higher power other than God is less likely than non-belief among offspring of mothers within these two groups. Adjustment for other substance use and parents remaining together until adulthood (the only potential confounders identified for the association between non-traditional beliefs and maternal religious affiliation) produced similar results for those who are uncertain of these beliefs to unadjusted odds ratios and confidence intervals reported in Table 19. Similarly, adjustment for potential confounders made little difference to the odds ratios for belief in a spiritual or higher power other than God, with the exception of two of the religious affiliation groups. The weak negative association observed for those with a Catholic background, just failed to reach statistical significance (Adjusted OR = 0.77; 95%CI: 0.60,1.00) and the strong negative association observed for Other Christian offspring became moderately significant (Adjusted OR = 0.62; 95%CI: 0.47,0.82). 135 Table 19: Maternal religious affiliation at entry to the study and non-traditional beliefs in young adulthood Young adult belief in a spiritual or higher power other than God Maternal n No Unsure Yes religious affiliation (n=1877) (n=946) (n=916) % OR % Unadj OR % Unadj OR (95%CI) (95%CI) No religion 511 46.0 1 25.0 1 29.0 1 Catholic 1063 50.5 1 25.5 0.93 24.0 0.75* (0.71,1.20) (0.58,0.97) Anglican 1083 45.4 1 28.0 1.13 26.6 0.93 (0.87,1.46) (0.72,1.20) Other Christian 780 56.3 1 22.7 0.74* 21.0 0.59*** (0.56,0.98) (0.45,0.78) Pentecostal 93 69.9 1 11.8 0.31** 18.3 0.41** (0.16,0.61) (0.23,0.74) Non-Christian 26 61.5 1 15.4 [0.46] 23.1 0.59 (0.15,1.40) (0.23,1.56) Not defined 50 50.0 1 38.0 1.39 12.0 0.38* (0.74,2.63) (0.15,0.95) Refused to answer 133 51.1 1 24.8 0.89 24.1 0.75 (0.56,1.42) (0.47,1.19) Total 3739 50.2 25.3 24.5 Reference groups: no belief and no religious affiliation *P = < 0.05 **P = < 0.01 ***P = < 0.001 [ ] indicates odds ratio based on cell count less than 5 Missing n = 38 The influence of maternal religious affiliation on young adult church attendance is highlighted in Table 20 below. Those young adults who attend church on a weekly basis are 20 times more likely to be offspring of mothers affiliated with one of the Pentecostal churches, around eight times more likely to be offspring of mothers affiliated with a non-Christian religion or other Christian religions, and more than twice as likely to be offspring of Catholic mothers, than those young adults who never attend church. Those young adults who attend church less frequently are around four times more likely to be offspring of mothers affiliated with a Pentecostal church, nearly three more times likely to be offspring of a Catholic mother, and over two and a half times more likely to have a mother affiliated with some other Christian church (similar to those whose mother refused to answer the religious affiliation item), than those young adults who never attend church. Interestingly, there appears to be no relationship between young adult church attendance on either a frequent or infrequent basis and having a mother who was affiliated with the Church of England at entry to the study. 136 Adjustment for the potential confounders identified for the association between maternal religious affiliation and young adult church attendance (maternal education, other substance use, and parents remaining together until adulthood) made little difference to the results reported in Table 20 for the unadjusted model (for example, Weekly church attendance and Pentecostal background – Adjusted OR = 20.0; 95%CI: 9.92,40.2). Table 20: Maternal religious affiliation at entry to the study and church attendance in young adulthood Young adult frequency of church attendance Maternal n Never Monthly or less Weekly religious affiliation (n=2873) (n=583) (n=301) % OR % Unadj OR % Unadj OR (95%CI) (95%CI) No religion 513 88.9 1 8.2 1 2.9 1 Catholic 1069 71.4 1 23.1 3.51*** 5.5 2.35** (2.48,4.97) (1.32,4.19) Anglican 1088 86.9 1 10.4 1.30 2.8 0.96 (0.89,1.88) (0.51,1.81) Other Christian 784 65.2 1 16.8 2.80*** 18.0 8.39*** (1.94,4.06) (4.85,14.5) Pentecostal 93 48.4 1 19.4 4.34*** 32.3 20.3*** (2.31,8.17) (10.15,40.5) Non-Christian 27 66.7 1 14.8 [2.41] 18.5 8.44*** (0.78,7.46) (2.76,25.8) Not defined 50 84.0 1 10.0 1.29 6.0 [2.17] (0.48,3.44) (0.60,7.80) Refused to answer 133 69.9 1 16.5 2.57** 13.5 5.88*** (1.46,4.50) (2.86,12.1) Total 3757 76.5 15.5 8.0 Reference groups: never attends church and no religious affiliation *P = < 0.05 **P = < 0.01 ***P = < 0.001 [ ] indicates odds ratio based on cell count less than 5 Missing n = 20 Summary of findings on religious background and young adult religiosity The findings related to religious background identify measures of maternal religiosity as being strongly related to traditional and non-traditional R/S beliefs and attendance at church on a weekly basis in young adulthood. The main findings are summarised below (Table 21) with the categories of religious affiliation being listed in descending order according to the strength and significance of the associations observed between them and the three domains of young adult religiosity examined. The findings included in the upper part of the table indicate 137 that maternal belief in God and weekly church attendance are both positively associated with young adult belief in God and weekly church attendance, but negatively associated with belief in a spiritual or higher power other than God. When considering maternal religious affiliation, offspring with a Pentecostal background stand out as the group most likely to maintain a traditional belief in God, to attend church on a weekly basis, and to reject non-traditional R/S beliefs. Those born to Anglican mothers stand apart from Catholics, other Christian religions, and Pentecostals as being no different to those raised by mother who stated that she had no religion at entry to the study in terms of either weekly church attendance or endorsement of non-traditional R/S beliefs. While rates of weekly church attendance observed for the non- Christian group are in line with those observed for the Other Christian group, caution needs to be taken when interpreting this result. Some of the non-Christian group may have reported never attending church because the item used on survey forms did not specify attendance at mosques or temples. Others from the non-Christian group may have assumed that the term “church” was designed to assess frequency of worship, and thus endorsed one of the responses that captured the frequency of their attendance at mosques or temples. One third of the non-Christian group reported attending church. Since the church attendance measure lacks content validity for non-Christians and estimates for this group are also subject to attrition bias, there is no way of knowing whether the estimates for the association between a non-Christian background and frequency of church attendance in young adulthood are an under- or overestimate. When considering the findings shown in the lower part of the summary table, an interesting pattern emerges in relation to the connections between maternal religiosity and young adults being unsure about their R/S beliefs in particular. Firstly, maternal belief in God is positively related to young adults’ uncertainty about the existence of God and has no relationship with their uncertainty about belief in a spiritual or higher power. A similar pattern emerges for maternal church attendance on a less than weekly basis. Thus, while maternal belief in God and weekly church attendance strongly predict these same beliefs/behaviours among their offspring and rejection of non-traditional R/S beliefs, maternal belief in God and infrequent church attendance also predict young adult uncertainty about God. Maternal belief in God appears to have no connection to the reduction of doubt in young adults’ minds about the possibility of the existence of spiritual or higher power other than God. This same absence of effect is evident for offspring of Anglican and Catholic mothers. Offspring of Anglican mothers also stand out as the only group that has no positive association with young adult church attendance on a less than weekly basis. Even though a range of potential confounders 138 were identified for associations between religious background and young adult religiosity, none of these were found to have any influence on the observed associations. Finally, sensitivity analyses revealed that the substitution of means values for missing potential confounder data had not biased any of the estimates reported in this section. Table 21: Summary table of main associations found between religious background and young adult religiosity Main associations observed for young adult religiosity Believes in a spiritual Religious background Believes in God Attends church weekly or higher power Maternal belief in God Positive Negative Positive Maternal weekly Positive Negative Positive church attendance Maternal religious Positive for: Negative for: Positive for: a affiliation Pentecostal Pentecostal Pentecostal b Catholic Other Christian Non-Christian b Non-Christian Catholic Other Christian Other Christian Catholic Anglican Null for: Null for: Anglican Anglican b Non-Christian Religious background Unsure of God Unsure of spiritual of Attends church higher power monthly or less Maternal belief in God Positive Null Positive Maternal church c attendance monthly or Positive Null Positive less Maternal religious Positive for: Negative for: Positive for: a affiliation Anglican Pentecostal Pentecostal Catholic Other Christian Catholic Other Christian Other Christian Null for: Null for: Null for: Pentecostal Catholic Anglican b Non-Christian Anglican a: Not defined, refused to answer categories omitted from table b: Estimates related to the non-Christian group are subject to bias due to attrition and small sample size c: A weak and negative association observed when sample restricted to those for whom maternal church attendance was measured at five years post-delivery Section Two: Religiosity and anxiety/depression The findings reported in this section reflect the results derived from univariate and multivariable logistic regression analyses undertaken to identify relationships between young adult religiosity, religious background and female and male anxiety/depression. It is important to note that multivariable models were only used in instances where significant associations were found between a given explanatory variable and anxiety/depression, with the potential 139 confounders included in these models being restricted to those identified from the initial linear regression analyses as being significantly associated with both the explanatory variable and anxiety/depression (see Appendix F). Young adult religiosity and anxiety/depression Young adult belief in God Table 22 shows the association observed between belief in God and anxiety/depression among female and male respondents. Females and males who believe in God, as well as those who are unsure whether or not they believe in God, appear to have neither an elevated nor a reduced risk for anxiety/depression compared to those who reject this belief. Table 22: Traditional beliefs and anxiety/depression among females and males in young adulthood Young adult anxiety/depression Females Males Belief in n % Unadj (95%CI) n % Unadj (95%CI) God Case OR Case OR No 378 5.0 1 1 447 2.5 1 Unsure 529 5.7 1.14 (0.63,2.05) 419 3.6 1.47 (0.67,3.24) Yes 899 5.3 1.07 (0.62,1.84) 739 3.1 1.27 (0.61,2.64) Total 1806 5.4 1605 3.1 Reference group is no belief Significance level set at P = < 0.05 Young adult belief in a spiritual or higher power other than God In contrast to the findings for traditional R/S beliefs, a positive association was found between non-traditional R/S beliefs and anxiety/depression for both males and females. Table 23 below shows the findings for females. Those females who believe in a spiritual or higher power other than God are 1.79 times more likely to be anxious and depressed than those who reject this belief. Since high use of alcohol and cannabis, other substance use, as well as parents remaining together until adulthood were identified as potential confounders, each of these variables were entered separately into multivariable logistic regression models. Little change of effect was observed from adjustment for alcohol use (Adjusted OR = 1.75; 95%CI: 1.09,2.82), cannabis use (Adjusted OR = 1.74; 95%CI: 1.08,2.81), other substance use (Adjusted OR = 1.73; 95%CI: 1.07,2.79), or parents remaining together (Adjusted OR = 1.75; 140 95%CI: 1.09,2.81). Once all of the variables were entered simultaneously into the one multivariable logistic regression model, the odds ratio for anxiety/depression reduced to 1.65, but the association remained weakly significant (see Table 23, Model 2). In order to test whether pre-existing anxiety/depression might predispose young adult females toward non-traditional beliefs in the first instance, and thus explain the link found between belief in a spiritual or higher power other than God and female anxiety/depression, Model 2 was repeated with the exclusion of all those females who were assessed from self- reports as having borderline threshold anxiety/depression at the time of the 14-year follow- up. The exclusion of this group led to a strengthening of this association, such that the adjusted odds ratio increased to 2.07 (95%CI: 1.20,3.57). This result suggests that the positive association observed between non-traditional R/S beliefs and female anxiety/depression is not explained by anxiety/depression in adolescence. Table 23: Non-traditional beliefs and anxiety/depression among young adult females Female anxiety/depression Belief in a n % Model 1 Model 2 spiritual or Case Unadj OR Adj OR higher power (95%CI) (95%CI) No 795 4.3 1 1 Unsure 485 4.9 1.16 1.11 (0.68,1.99) (0.65,1.90) Yes 526 7.4 1.79* 1.65* (1.12,2.88) (1.02,2.66) Total 1806 5.4 Reference group is no belief *P = < 0.05 Model 2: Adjusted for alcohol, cannabis, and other substance use, and parents remaining together in young adulthood For males, belief in a spiritual or higher power is also associated with an elevated risk for being anxious/depressed (2.5 times that of the no belief group – see Table 24). Adjustment for potential confounders individually, led to a small reduction in the odds ratio in the case of cannabis use (Adjusted OR = 2.24; 95%CI: 1.13,4.44), but little change of effect was observed for either other substance use (Adjusted OR = 2.53; 95%CI: 1.28,4.44), parents remaining together (Adjusted OR = 2.46; 95%CI: 1.25,4.86) or quality of neighbourhood (Adjusted OR = 2.45; 95%CI: 1.24,4.84). Once all of these potential confounders where entered simultaneously into the one multivariable model (see Table 24, Model 2), the odds ratio reduced to 2.21. 141 After re-running Model 2, with the exclusion of those males who had borderline anxiety/depression in adolescence (according to self-report), the association between belief in a spiritual or higher power other than God and male anxiety/depression was not statistically significant (Adjusted OR = 1.77; 95%CI: 0.81,3.87). Thus, it appears that for males, pre- existing anxiety/depression may lead to the uptake of non-traditional R/S beliefs, and may therefore explain the association between non-traditional R/S beliefs and male anxiety/depression in young adulthood. Table 24: Non-traditional beliefs and anxiety/depression among young adult males Male anxiety/depression in young adulthood Belief in a n % Model 1 Model 2 spiritual or Case Unadj OR Adj OR higher power (95%CI) (95%CI) No 914 2.1 1 1 Unsure 376 3.7 1.82 1.79 (0.90,3.67) (0.88,3.62) Yes 315 5.1 2.52** 2.21* (1.28,4.96) (1.11,4.41) Total 1605 3.1 Reference group is no belief *P = < 0.05 ** P = < 0.01 Model 2: Adjusted for cannabis, and other substance use, parents remaining together, and quality of neighbourhood in young adulthood Young adult church attendance Like belief in God, frequency of church attendance among young adults appears to be unrelated to anxiety/depression, as shown in Table 25 below. Neither infrequent nor regular church attenders have rates of anxiety/depression that differ from those who never attend church. This applies to both females and males. 142 Table 25: Church attendance and anxiety/depression among young adult females and males Anxiety/depression in young adulthood Females Males (N = 1806) (N = 1605) Church n % Unadj OR n % Unadj OR attendance (95%CI) Case Case Never 1379 5.7 1 1220 3.4 1 Monthly or less 267 3.0 0.51 262 2.3 0.67 (0.24,1.06) (0.28,1.60) Weekly 160 6.3 1.10 123 1.6 0.48 (0.56,2.16) (0.11,1.99) Total 1806 5.4 1605 3.1 Reference group is no church attendance Significance level set at P = < 0.05 Religious background and anxiety/depression in young adulthood Maternal belief in God, church attendance, and religious affiliation The results from logistic regression analyses examining connections between maternal belief in God, church attendance and religious affiliation and young adult anxiety/depression suggest that these measures of maternal religiosity during young adults’ formative years have no direct connection to anxiety/depression in young adulthood for either males or females (see Table 26 below). 143 Table 26: Religious background and anxiety/depression among young adult females and males Anxiety/depression in young adulthood Females Males (N = 1806) (N = 1605) Religious n % Unadj OR n % Unadj OR background Case (95%CI) Case (95%CI) Maternal belief in God at entry to the study No/Don’t know 356 7.3 1 319 3.4 1 Yes 1450 4.9 0.65 1286 3.0 0.85 (0.41,1.04) (0.43,1.69) Total 1806 5.4 1605 3.1 Maternal church attendance in offspring’s early years Never 1049 5.6 1 933 3.0 1 Monthly or less 425 3.8 0.66 358 3.9 1.31 (0.37,1.15) (0.68,2.53) Weekly 332 6.6 1.19 314 2.2 0.74 (0.72,1.97) (0.32,1.71) Total 1806 5.4 1605 3.1 Maternal religious affiliation No religion 230 5.2 1 225 4.4 1 Catholic 515 5.0 0.97 471 2.5 0.56 (0.48,1.95) (0.24,1.32) Anglican 540 6.1 1.18 376 2.2 0.49 (0.60,2.33) (0.20,1.19) Other Christian 440 5.2 1.00 84 3.7 0.83 (0.49,2.05) (0.36,1.91) Other groups* 81 3.7 0.70 225 3.6 0.80 (0.19,2.54) (0.21,2.97) Total 1806 5.4 1605 3.1 Reference categories: no belief; no church attendance; no religious affiliation Significance level set at P = 0.05 * Includes non-Christians, those who refused to respond to the religious affiliation item, and ill-defined religion Independent associations between non-traditional beliefs and anxiety/depression in young adulthood In order to assess the extent that the positive associations between belief in a spiritual or higher power other than God and young adult anxiety/depression might be affected by other factors related to young adult religiosity, further multivariable logistic regression models were used. Adjustment for belief in God led to a slight increase in the odds ratio for both females and males (Females – Adjusted OR = 1.86; 95%CI: 1.13,3.08 and Males – Adjusted OR = 2.52; 95%CI: 1.26,5.01), as did adjustment for frequency of church attendance (Females – Adjusted OR = 1.81; 95%CI: 1.10,2.99 and Males – Adjusted OR = 2.44; 95%CI: 1.23,4.81). Adjustment for both of these influences and potential confounders revealed the odds ratio for 144 anxiety/depression for females who hold non-traditional R/S beliefs to be 1.78 (1.05,3.01) and for males, 2.15 (1.06,4.36). Thus, young adult females who believe in a spiritual or higher power other than God are 1.78 times, and males 2.15 times more likely than those who reject these beliefs to have anxiety/depression in young adulthood when other R/S, social factors, and health-risk behaviours are taken into account. Summary of findings on young adult anxiety/depression The following summary table (Table 27) provides an overview of the associations found between young adult religiosity and religious background and anxiety/depression in young adulthood. Overall, the findings show that there is no association between either belief in God or participation in church services in young adulthood, or religious background and borderline anxiety/depression among the study sample. By contrast, religiosity involving non-traditional R/S beliefs appears to place young adults, both female and male, at increased risk for anxiety/depression. However, the increased likelihood of males being anxious/depressed from belief in a spiritual or higher power other than God appears to be linked to them having been anxious/depressed in adolescence. Table 27: Summary table of main associations found between religiosity and young adult anxiety/depression Young adult anxiety/depression Dimension of Indicator Females Males religiosity Young adult religiosity Belief in God Null Null Belief in a spiritual or a Positive Positive higher power Church attendance Null Null Religious background Maternal belief in God Null Null Maternal church Null Null attendance Maternal religious Null Null affiliation a Not statistically significant when the sample is restricted to males without a history of anxiety/depression in adolescence Finally, all the analyses related to anxiety/depression were repeated with the exclusion of those young adults for whom missing potential confounder data had been assigned mean values. The results were almost identical. Thus, the estimates reported throughout this section have not been affected by bias related to the substitution of mean values for missing data. 145 Section 3: Religiosity and delusional ideation This section presents the results for the logistic regression analyses undertaken to detect links between young adult religiosity and religious background, and delusional ideation. Where significant associations were found, multivariable logistic regression models were then used, including variables identified as potential confounders (see Appendix G, Tables G1 and G2 for potential confounder identified for religious ideation and total PDI scores respectively). Young adult religiosity and delusional ideation Young adult belief in God Univariate logistic regression analyses revealed that there are no significant differences between young adults who believe in God and those who reject this belief for the domains of disturbed ideation, suspiciousness, or paranormal ideation. Nor were any differences found between those who stated that they were unsure if they believed in God and the non-belief group for these delusional domains. The results for each of these three domains are provided in the one table below, Table 28. Since the religious ideation items from the PDI rest on belief in God, religious ideation was excluded from this set of analyses. Table 28: Traditional beliefs and disturbed, suspicious, and paranormal ideation among young adults a Disturbed Suspicious Paranormal Belief in God n % Case Unadj OR % Unadj OR % Unadj OR a (95% CI) Case (95% CI) Case (95% CI) No 815 11.2 1 19.6 1 20.1 1 Unsure 927 11.8 1.06 20.7 1.07 18.3 0.89 (0.79,1.42) (0.85,1.35) (0.70,1.13) Yes 1592 11.7 1.06 18.7 0.94 19.5 0.96 (0.81,1.38) (0.76,1.17) (0.78,1.19) Total 3334 11.6 19.5 19.3 Reference group is no belief Significance level set at P = < 0.05 a: Adjustment for gender had no effect on the associations between either the unsure or yes groups and paranormal ideation While those young adults who believe in God appear to be no different to those who reject this belief in regard to the delusional domains of disturbed, suspicious, and paranormal 146 ideation, they are at greater risk for high total PDI scores. Table 29 shows that after adjustment for cannabis use (Model 2) the relationship between belief in God and high total PDI scores strengthens somewhat, and the null association for those who are unsure if they believe in God in the unadjusted model (Model 1) becomes weakly significant. There is no change in the significance of the association for the unsure group when adjustment is made for other substance use only (Model 3). When both of these factors are taken into account in the one multivariable model (Model 4), the group who are uncertain about believing in God are around 1.43 times more likely to have high total PDI scores than those who do not believe in God. The same pattern of increase in the odds ratio emerges for those who believe in God after adjustment for cannabis use (Model 2) and for other substance use (Model 3). After adjustment for both of these factors simultaneously (Model 4), believers in God are twice as likely to have high total PDI scores as those who reject this belief. The reason for these somewhat curious results becomes clear later in this section of results, when adjustment is made for non-traditional R/S beliefs when investigation focuses on determining the independent contribution of belief in God to high total PDI scores. Table 29: Traditional beliefs and total PDI scores among young adults High total PDI scores Belief in a n % Case Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 spiritual or Unadj OR Adj OR Adj OR Adj OR higher (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) power No 815 9.0 1 1 1 1 Unsure 927 10.9 1.24 1.39* 1.30 1.43* (0.90,1.71) (1.00,1.92) (0.94,1.79) (1.03,1.99) Yes 1592 13.8 1.63** 1.92*** 1.71*** 1.97*** (1.23,2.15) (1.44,2.56) (1.29,2.27) 1.47,2.64) Total 3334 11.6 Reference group is no belief *P = < 0.05 **P = < 0.01***P = < 0.001 Model 2: Adjusted for cannabis use in young adulthood Model 3: Adjusted for other substance use in young adulthood Model 4: Adjusted for cannabis use and other substance use in young adulthood Young adult belief in a spiritual or higher power The results from univariate and multivariable logistic regression analyses examining associations between non-traditional R/S and delusional ideation reveal that a non-traditional approach to the divine is strongly and positively associated with upper decile scores for three 147 of the delusional ideation domains (disturbed, suspicious, paranormal), as well as total PDI scores, and negatively associated with religious ideation. In regard to disturbed ideation, Table 30 shows that those who believe in a spiritual or higher power other than God are more than twice as likely to score in the upper decile of disturbed ideation. There is a very slight reduction in the odds ratio for those who hold this belief following adjustment for cannabis use in young adulthood (Model 2) and for quality of neighbourhood in young adulthood (Model 3). Adjustment for each of the other potential confounders also led to a trivial reduction in the odds ratio for the believer group, including other substance use (Adjusted OR=2.16; 95%CI: 1.69,2.75) and parents remaining together until young adulthood (Adjusted OR=2.19; 95%CI: 1.72,2.79) (not shown in Table 30). After adjustment for all influences identified as potential confounders (Model 4), the association between non-traditional R/S beliefs and disturbed ideation remains highly significant, with the risk for disturbed ideation being almost twice that of the reference group (those who reject non-traditional beliefs). No appreciable difference was observed when Model 4 was re-run with young adults who had thought problems in adolescence being excluded from the analysis (Adjusted OR = 1.93; 95%CI: 1.47,2.54). Table 30: Non-traditional beliefs and disturbed ideation among young adults Disturbed ideation Belief in a n % Case Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 spiritual or Unadj OR Adj OR Adj OR Adj OR higher (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) power No 1683 9.2 1 1 1 1 Unsure 834 9.7 1.06 1.06 1.07 1.06 (0.80,1.41) (0.80,1.41) (0.80,1.42) (0.80,1.42) Yes 817 18.5 2.23*** 2.09*** 2.15*** 1.97*** (1.75,2.85) (1.63,2.67) (1.69,2.75) (1.54,2.53) Total 3334 11.6 Reference group is no belief ***P = < 0.001 Model 2: Adjusted for cannabis use in young adulthood Model 3: Adjusted for quality of neighbourhood Model 4: Adjusted for cannabis use, other substance use, quality of neighbourhood, and parents together in young adulthood. The results for delusional ideation characterised by suspiciousness (or paranoid ideation) are shown in Table 31. The positive and highly significant association between belief in a spiritual or higher power other than God and suspicious ideation persists after adjustment for 148 cannabis use (Model 2), and quality of neighbourhood (Model 3). Additional multivariable logistic regression analyses revealed that adjustment for other substance use and for parents remaining together until young adulthood (not shown in Table 30) had little effect on this association (Adjusted OR=1.62; 95%CI:1.32,1.98 and Adjusted OR=1.61; 95%CI: 1.32,1.97 respectively). Once all potential confounders were entered into the one model (Model 4) the increased risk for suspicious ideation from non-traditional R/S beliefs reduces to 1.5, but remains highly significant. Repeating this analysis with the exclusion of those who had thought problems in adolescence made little difference to the observed association (Adjusted OR = 1.52; 95%CI: 1.21,1.90). Table 31: Non-traditional beliefs and suspiciousness among young adults Suspicious ideation Belief in a n % Case Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 spiritual or Unadj OR Adj OR Adj OR Adj OR higher (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) power No 1683 17.1 1 1 1 1 Unsure 834 18.5 1.10 1.10 1.10 1.10 (0.88,1.36) (0.88,1.36) (0.89,1.37) (0.88,1.37) Yes 817 25.5 1.65*** 1.57*** 1.60*** 1.50*** (1.35,2.02) (1.28,1.93) (1.31,1.97) (1.22,1.84) Total 3334 19.5 Reference group is no belief ***P = < 0.001 Model 2: Adjusted for cannabis use in young adulthood Model 3: Adjusted for quality of neighbourhood Model 5: Adjusted for cannabis use, other substance use, quality of neighbourhood, and parents together in young adulthood. Table 32 depicts the results from the logistic regression analyses that examine the link between belief in a spiritual or higher power other than God and paranormal ideation. Those who endorse non-traditional beliefs are more than four times more likely than those who reject these beliefs to have high levels of paranormal ideation. After adjustment for gender (since paranormal ideation was observed to more prevalent among females – see Model 2), gender and cannabis use (Models 3), and gender and quality of neighbourhood (Model 4), this effect remains strong and highly significant. Likewise, adjustment for gender and other substance use, and for gender and parents remaining together until adulthood (not shown in Table 32) made little difference to this association (Adjusted OR=4.36; 95%CI: 3.54,5.35 and Adjusted OR=4.38; 95%CI:3.57,5.38 respectively). After adjustment for all potential 149 confounders (Model 5), the odds ratio for paranormal ideation is still more than four. These results are not surprising given that the paranormal ideation items include belief in the power in witchcraft, the occult, or voodoo, in telepathic communication, and two items that capture grandiosity – all aspects associated with the New Spirituality. Most interesting though is that those who are unsure whether or not they endorse non-traditional beliefs are 1.38 times more likely than those who reject belief in a spiritual or higher power to score in the upper decile range of paranormal ideation (see Model 1). After adjustment for various potential confounders (Models 2, 3, and 4) the significance of the association changed from moderate to weak. This same pattern emerged after adjustment for gender and other substance use, and gender remaining together until adulthood (not shown in Table 32 – adjusted OR=1.36; 95%CI: 1.07,1.72 and adjusted OR=1.36; 95%CI: 1.07,1.72 respectively). After adjustment for all of these influences in the one model (Model 5), the association remains weakly significant. The exclusion of young adults with thought problems in adolescence and the re-running of Model 5 produced similar results (Unsure – adjusted OR = 1.37; 95%CI: 1.06,1.77 and Yes – adjusted OR = 4.31; 95%CI: 3.45,5.39). Table 32: Non-traditional beliefs and paranormal ideation among young adults Paranormal ideation Belief in a n % Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5 spiritual Case Unadj OR Adj OR Adj OR Adj OR Adj OR or higher (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) power No 1683 12.0 1 1 1 1 1 Unsure 834 15.8 1.38** 1.36* 1.35* 1.37* 1.35* (1.09,1.75) (1.07,1.73) (1.06,1.71) (1.08,1.73) (1.06,1.71) Yes 817 38.1 4.51*** 4.43*** 4.19*** 4.36*** 4.11*** (3.67,5.52) (3.61,5.44) (3.40,5.15) (3.55,5.36) (3.34,5.07) Total 3334 19.3 Reference group is no belief * P = < 0.05 ** P = < 0.01 ***P = < 0.001 Model 2: Adjusted for gender Model 3: Adjusted for gender and cannabis use in young adulthood Model 4: Adjusted for gender and quality of neighbourhood Model 5: Adjusted for gender, cannabis and other substance use in young adulthood, quality of neighbourhood, and parents remaining together in young adulthood Table 33 shows that those who endorse, as well as those who are unsure whether or not they endorse non-traditional R/S beliefs are much less likely than those who reject these beliefs to score highly on the religious ideation factor. Adjustment for the only potential 150 confounder identified for this association, parents remaining together until adulthood (Model 2), made no difference to this association. The repeating of Model 2 with the exclusion of young adults who had borderline thought problems in adolescence made little change to these associations (Unsure – adjusted OR = 0.18; 95%CI: 0.12,0.28 and Yes – adjusted OR = 0.51; 95%CI: 0.37,0.69). Most interesting is that the negative effect on religious ideation is stronger for those who are uncertain whether they believe in a spiritual or higher power than it is for those who endorse this belief. This is no doubt due to the fact that around 10 per cent of those who endorse non-traditional R/S beliefs also believe in God, while the majority of those who are uncertain about this belief are also uncertain about God. Table 33: Non-traditional beliefs and religious ideation among young adults Religious ideation Belief in a spiritual or n % Case Model 1 Model 2 higher power Unadj OR Adj OR (95%CI) (95%CI) No 1683 14.7 1 1 Unsure 834 3.0 0.18*** 0.18*** (0.12, 0.27) (0.12,0.27) Yes 817 7.6 0.47*** 0.48*** (0.35,0.64) (0.36,0.64) Total 3334 10.0 Reference group is no belief ***P = < 0.001 Model 2: Adjusted for parents remaining together until adulthood Table 34 shows that non-traditional beliefs are associated with a more than two-fold increased risk for high total PDI scores. There is little attenuation of effect after adjustment for cannabis use (Model 2), quality of neighbourhood (Model 3), or for two other factors not shown in Table 34 (parents remaining together until adulthood – adjusted OR=2.55; 95%CI: 2.01,3.23 and other substance use – adjusted OR=2.52; 95%CI: 1.99,3.20). Once all potential confounders were entered simultaneously into the same logistic regression model (Model 4), there was a small reduction in the odds for high total PDI scores from that observed in the unadjusted model (Model 1). No differences are evident for the unsure group compared to the no belief group. The exclusion of young adults with thought problems in adolescence from the Model 4 analysis yielded similar results to those obtained using the whole sample, although the odds ratio diminished slightly (Adjusted OR = 2.34; 95%CI: 1.79,3.05). 151 Table 34: Non-traditional beliefs and total PDI scores among young adults High total PDI scores Belief in a n % Case Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 spiritual or Unadj OR Adj OR Adj OR Adj OR higher (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) power No 1683 9.2 1 1 1 Unsure 834 8.2 0.87 0.87 0.88 0.87 (0.65,1.18) (0.64,1.18) (0.65,1.19) (0.64,1.18) Yes 817 20.9 2.61*** 2.44*** 2.53*** 2.31*** (2.06,3.30) (1.91,3.10) (1.99,3.21) (1.81,2.95) Total 3334 11.8 Reference group is no belief ***P = < 0.001 Model 2: Adjusted for cannabis use in young adulthood Model 3: Adjusted for quality of neighbourhood Model 4: Adjusted for cannabis and other substance use in young adulthood, quality of neighbourhood, and parents remaining together until young adulthood. Young adult church attendance Young adult church attendance was found to have no association with disturbed or suspicious ideation or high total PDI scores, as shown in Table 35 below. Neither those who attend church on a weekly basis, nor those who attend church monthly or less have higher or lower rates of delusional ideation in the domains of disturbed and suspicious ideation than those who never attend church. Most noteworthy is that churchgoers, regardless of how often they attend church, have no elevated risk for high total PDI scores, in contrast to the results found for belief in God reported earlier in this section. 152 Table 35: Young adult church attendance and disturbed ideation, suspiciousness, and high total PDI scores Disturbed Suspicious High total PDI scores Young adult n % Unadj OR % Unadj OR % Unadj OR church attendance Case (95%CI) Case (95%CI) Case (95%CI) Never 2250 11.8 1 19.7 1 11.6 1 Monthly or 454 12.0 1.02 19.6 0.99 11.8 1.02 (0.76,1.37) (0.78,1.26) (0.76,1.37) Weekly 243 9.3 0.77 17.2 0.84 14.2 1.26 (0.50,1.18) (0.60,1.18) (0.88,1.82) Total 3334 11.6 19.5 11.8 Reference group is no belief Significance level set at P = < 0.05 Interestingly, those who attend church on a monthly or less basis are less likely than those who never attend church to have high scores for paranormal ideation, while regular churchgoers appear to be no different in this regard to those who never attend church (see Table 36 below). Adjustment for gender (Model 2) has no effect on this relationship. Adjustment for the other two potential confounders identified for this association, alcohol use and parents remaining together, also make little difference to the effects observed for the two church attending groups (Model 3). Table 36: Young adult church attendance and paranormal ideation Paranormal ideation Young adult n % Case Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 church Unadj OR Adj OR Adj OR attendance (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) Never 2250 20.3 1 1 1 Monthly or less 454 14.9 0.69** 0.69** 0.70** (0.53,0.89) (0.53,0.90) (0.54,0.91) Weekly 243 18.7 0.90 0.89 0.91 (0.65,1.24) (0.65,1.23) (0.66,1.27) Total 3334 19.3 Reference group is no belief **P = < 0.01 Model 2: Adjusted for gender Model 3: Adjusted for gender, alcohol use, and parents remaining together While religious ideation was excluded from analyses examining belief in God because 153 this form of ideation rests on belief in God, it was included in the analyses related to church attendance to determine any differences that might exist between those who never attend church and those who attend on an irregular basis. As might be expected, those who attend church irregularly are four times more likely to endorse both of the religious ideation items (believing in being “especially close to God” and having “been chosen by God in some way”) than non-churchgoers, while regular churchgoers are nearly 40 times more likely than non- churchgoers to endorse both of these items (see Table 37). There is little change in this effect following adjustment for the potential confounders of this association (maternal age and education, race, parents remaining together until adulthood, alcohol consumption) either individually (not shown in Table 37), or when entered simultaneously in the one multivariable model (see Model 2). The re-running of the full multivariable model, excluding those with thought problems in adolescence yielded similar results to those found for the total sample (monthly or less attendance – Adjusted OR = 4.20; 95%CI: 2.99,5.90 and weekly attendance – Adjusted OR = 38.0, 95%CI: 26.79,53.8). Table 37: Young adult church attendance and religious ideation Religious ideation Young adult n % Case Model 1 Model 2 church Unadj OR Adj OR attendance (95%CI) (95%CI) Never 2250 3.9 1 1 Monthly or less 454 14.0 4.01*** 4.00*** (2.91,5.53) (2.90,5.53) Weekly 243 61.2 39.0*** 37.9*** (28.4,53.6) (27.1,52.9) Total 3334 10.0 Reference group is never attends church ***P = < 0.001 Model 2: Adjusted for maternal age and education, race, alcohol use and parents remaining together in young adulthood Religious background and delusional ideation in young adulthood Maternal belief in God Young adults whose mothers believed in God at entry to the study appear to be no different than those whose mothers did not believe (or were unsure whether or not they believed) in God in regard to high scores for disturbed ideation, suspiciousness, paranormal ideation or total PDI scores, as shown below in Table 38. 154 Table 38: Maternal belief in God and disturbed, suspicious, and paranormal ideation, and high total PDI scores in young adulthood Young adult delusional ideation Form of Maternal n % Case Unadj OR a delusional belief in ideation God (95%CI) Disturbed No/unsure 664 13.4 1 Yes 2670 11.2 0.81 (0.63,1.05) Total 3334 11.6 Suspicious No/unsure 664 17.2 1 Yes 2670 20.1 1.21 (0.97,1.51) Total 3334 19.5 a Paranormal No/unsure 664 17.8 1 Yes 2670 19.7 1.14 (0.91,1.42) Total 3334 19.3 Total PDI scores No/unsure 664 12.2 1 Yes 2670 11.7 0.96 (0.74,1.24) Total 3334 11.8 Reference group is no belief Significance level set at P = < 0.05 a: Adjustment for gender made no difference to the association between maternal belief in God and paranormal ideation Maternal belief in God does predict religious ideation however, with offspring of mothers who believed in God being over two and a half times more likely to endorse both religious ideation items than offspring of mothers who did not endorse this belief at entry to the study (see Table 39, Model 1). Adjustment for each of the potential confounders of this association individually, had little effect (maternal age and education, race, and parents remaining together until young adulthood – not shown in Table 39). Adjustment for all of these influences simultaneously also makes little difference to this association, as shown in Table 39, Model 2. Re-running these analyses with the exclusion of those young adult were assessed to have borderline thought problems produced similar results (Adjusted OR = 2.55; 95%CI: 1.71,3.81). 155 Table 39: Maternal belief in God and religious ideation in young adulthood Religious ideation in young adulthood Maternal n % Case Model 1 Model 2 church Unadj OR Adj OR attendance (95%CI) (95%CI) No/unsure 664 4.5 1 1 Yes 2670 11.4 2.72*** 2.60*** (1.85,3.99) (1.76,3.82) Total 3334 10.0 Reference group is mother never attending church ***P = < 0.001 Model 2: Adjusted for maternal age and education, race, and parents remaining together in young adulthood Maternal church attendance in the young adults’ early years Like maternal belief in God, maternal church attendance during the child’s early years appears to have no relationship with offspring delusional ideation in the domains of disturbed, suspicious, or paranormal ideation, or high total PDI scores, as shown in Table 40 below. 156 Table 40: Maternal church attendance and disturbed, suspicious, and paranormal ideation, and total PDI scores in young adulthood Young adult delusional ideation Form of Maternal church n % Case Unadj OR a delusional attendance (95%CI) ideation Disturbed Never 1938 11.8 1 Monthly or less 769 10.8 0.90 (0.70,1.18) Weekly 627 12.0 1.01 (0.77,1.34) Total 3334 11.6 Suspicious Never 1938 19.9 1 Monthly or less 769 19.6 0.99 (0.80,1.22) Weekly 627 18.2 0.90 (0.71,1.13) Total 3334 19.5 a Paranormal Never 1938 19.8 1 Monthly or less 769 18.9 0.94 (0.76,1.17) Weekly 627 18.7 0.93 (0.74,1.17) Total 3334 19.3 Total PDI Never 1938 11.5 1 Monthly or less 769 10.8 0.93 (0.72,1.22) Weekly 627 14.2 1.28 (0.98,1.67) Total 3334 11.8 Reference group is mother never attending church Significance level set at P = < 0.05 a: Adjustment for gender made no difference to the associations for paranormal ideation for either of the church attendance groups Similar to the results for maternal belief in God, maternal church attendance is strongly associated with religious ideation in young adulthood. Table 41 shows that offspring of weekly church attenders are around eight times more likely, and those whose mothers attended church monthly or less are around twice as likely, to endorse both religious ideation items than those whose mothers never attended church during the young adults’ early years (Model 1). Multivariable logistic regression models were used to determine whether adjustment for potential confounders affected this association (alcohol use, maternal education and age, race, and parents remaining together until adulthood). As with maternal belief in God, adjustment 157 for each of the potential confounders identified for this association produced little change in effect (not shown in Table 41). After adjustment for all of these influences in the one multivariable model (Model 2), the odds ratio reduces slightly, but the association remains highly significant. Re-running Model 2 with the exclusion of young adults who had borderline thought problems in adolescence, produced similar results (Monthly or less – adjusted OR = 1.94; 95%CI: 1.37,2.74 and Weekly – adjusted OR = 7.63; 95%CI: 5.68,10.2). A sensitivity analysis also showed that the exclusion of the small number of young adults for whom maternal church attendance was measured during the prenatal period instead of 5 years post-delivery made little difference to the association reported in Model 2. Table 41: Maternal church attendance and religious ideation in young adulthood Religious ideation Maternal n % Case Model 1 Model 2 church Unadj OR Unadj OR attendance (95%CI) (95%CI) Never 1938 4.5 1 1 Monthly or less 769 9.1 2.10*** 2.04*** (1.52,2.92) (1.47,2.83) Weekly 627 28.2 8.27*** 7.68*** (6.28,10.9) (5.79,10.2) Total 3334 10.0 Reference group is mother never attending church ***P = < 0.001 Model 2: Adjusted for maternal age and education, race, alcohol use, and parents remaining together in young adulthood Maternal religious affiliation Before discussing the results for maternal religious affiliation and young adult delusional ideation, it is important to note that the seven-category religious affiliation variable was used for these analyses. Due to the small numbers of mothers identifying with particular religious groups, the Other Christian group includes a range of diverse religious groups including Lutherans, Methodists, Orthodox Christian groups, Jehovah’s Witnesses, and numerous other groups. This category is given little attention in discussion since it involves a range of Christian religions encompassing different doctrines and practices. The Pentecostal group has been kept as a distinct category, since this religious affiliation differs from other Christian affiliations (including other Charismatic religious groups) in that its doctrine actively promotes the practice of speaking in tongues. Non-Christian religions and religious affiliation that was 158 not described by the study mothers are collapsed into a single category “Other”. It can be seen from Table 42 below that maternal religious affiliation appears to have no association with disturbed, suspicious, or paranormal ideation in young adulthood. Even though rates of disturbed and paranormal ideation for the Pentecostal group appear to be somewhat higher than the reference group, these differences are not statistically significant. Table 42: Maternal religious affiliation and disturbed, suspicious, and paranormal ideation in young adulthood Disturbed Suspicious Paranormal a Maternal religious n % Case Unadj OR % Case Unadj OR % Unadj OR a affiliation (95%CI) (95%CI) Case (95%CI) No religion 453 11.7 1 19.2 1 20.3 1 Catholic 966 10.2 0.86 19.6 1.02 18.4 0.89 (0.60,1.23) (0.77,1.36) (0.67,1.17) Anglican 968 12.6 1.09 19.5 1.02 19.7 0.96 (0.77,1.53) (0.77,1.36) (0.73,1.27) Other Christian 708 10.3 0.87 19.4 1.01 17.1 0.81 (0.60,1.27) (0.74,1.35) (0.60,1.10) Pentecostal 84 19.0 1.78 20.2 1.07 28.6 1.57 (0.96,3.29) (0.60,1.91) (0.93,2.65) b Others 61 13.1 1.78 24.6 1.37 19.7 0.96 (0.96,3.29) (0.73,2.57) (0.49,1.88) No answer 94 17.0 1.55 17.0 0.86 28.7 1.58 (0.84,2.85) (0.48,1.55) (0.96,2.61) Total 3334 11.6 19.5 19.3 Reference group is no religion Significance level set at P = < 0.05 a: Adjustment for gender made no difference to the associations between any of the religious affiliation groups and paranormal ideation b: Includes non-Christian and non-defined groups Differences found between the various maternal religious affiliation groups under examination and young adult religious ideation are depicted in Table 43. Attention to the odds ratios highlight that offspring of mothers affiliated with one of the Pentecostal churches have the greatest likelihood of endorsing both religious items in the PDI. The odds ratio of more than 15 suggests that maternal involvement with Pentecostal churches has a long-term influence over a young adult’s belief that they have a special relationship with God. Interestingly, offspring of mothers who refused to answer the religious affiliation item are over six times more likely than those born to mothers with no religion to endorse both 159 religious ideation items, while offspring of Catholic mothers are 1.83 times more likely than the reference group to endorse both items. Offspring of Anglican mothers however, are no different in their rates of religious ideation to those whose mothers had no religious affiliation at entry to the study. Adjustment for potential confounders, maternal education (Model 2), for parents remaining together until adulthood (Model 3), and for both of these influences (Model 4) led to minimal change for any of the religious affiliation categories. Likewise, the re-running of this analysis with the exclusion of those young adults who had thought problems in adolescence produced similar results to those found reported for Model 4. The sensitivity analysis undertaken to determine the effect from mean values being substituted for missing potential confounder data revealed that the odds ratio for religious ideation for the Pentecostal group increased once those for whom missing data for the variable measuring parents remaining together until adulthood were excluded from the model. (Adjusted OR = 20.4; 95%CI: 10.5, 39.6). This was due to an increase in the rate of religious ideation among the Pentecostal group relative to the reference group (increased from 42.9% to 49.3%, while the rate for the no religious affiliation group remained the same – 4.6%) following the exclusion of individuals for whom there were missing data for the parents remaining together variable. The estimates for all other religious affiliation groups were similar to those reported for Model 4. 160 Table 43: Maternal religious affiliation and religious ideation in young adulthood Religious ideation in young adulthood Maternal n % Case Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 religious Unadj OR Adj OR Adj OR Adj OR affiliation (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) No religion 453 4.6 1 1 1 1 Catholic 966 8.2 1.83* 1.87* 1.82* 1.86* (1.12,3.00) (1.14,3.07) (1.11,2.98) (1.13,3.05) Anglican 968 5.6 1.21 1.27 1.20 1.26 (0.72,2.04) (0.76,2.13) (0.72,2.02) (0.75,2.12) Other Christian 708 15.8 3.87*** 3.97*** 3.81*** 3.92*** (2.39,6.26) (2.45,6.44) (2.35,6.18) (2.42,6.36) Pentecostal 84 42.9 15.4*** 15.3*** 15.2*** 15.1*** (8.34,28.5) (8.2,28.4) (8.19,28.1) (8.13,28.0) a Other 61 16.4 4.03** 4.16** 4.02** 4.14** (1.80,9.04) (1.85,9.35) (1.79,9.01) (1.84,9.31) No answer 94 24.5 6.66*** 6.42*** 6.56*** 6.35*** (3.50,12.7) (3.37,12.2) (3.45,12.5) (3.33,12.1) Total 3334 10.0 Reference group is no religion *P = < 0.05 ** P = < 0.01 ***P = < 0.001 a: Includes non-Christian and non-defined groups Model 2: Adjusted for maternal education Model 3: Adjusted for parents remaining together until adulthood Model 4: Adjusted for maternal education and parents remaining together until adulthood The results for total PDI scores shown in Table 44 that offspring of mothers who were affiliated with one of the Pentecostal churches are more than twice as likely as the reference group to have high total PDI scores (Model 1). Offspring of mothers affiliated with the Catholic, Anglican or Other Christian religions do not differ from those whose mothers had no religious affiliation at entry to the study in regard to their rates of high total PDI scores. After adjustment for potential confounders, the effect for the Pentecostal group persists, and the association for the no answer group becomes weakly significant (see Model 2). When those with thought problems in adolescence were excluded from this model, the results remained much the same for all groups, with the odds ratio for religious ideation increasing slightly for the Pentecostal group (OR = 2.74; 95%CI: 1.41,5.34). The higher total PDI scores among the Pentecostal group are not surprising given that this group’s rate of disturbed and paranormal ideation tended to be higher than the reference group, even though these differences failed to reach statistical significance (see Table 42). 161 With each individual PDI item being taken into account in the total PDI score, the Pentecostal group’s tendency to endorse items within each of the domains of disturbed and paranormal ideation, as well as religious ideation, helps to explain the higher total PDI scores observed for this group. The items that assess disturbed ideation include having felt “as if you have no thoughts in your head at all” or that your thoughts “feel alien to you in some way”, and feeling as if you are “a robot or zombie without a will of your own”. Since Pentecostal churches practise speaking in tongues, endorsement of these items may well reflect the dissociative experiences of those who have attended Pentecostal services at some stage of their lives when “speaking in tongues”, believing that they were taken over by the Holy Spirit at the time. Similarly, endorsement of items in the domain of paranormal (and grandiose) ideation, and religious ideation, indicate a tendency for this group to believe in the supernatural, that they are destined to be important, and that they have a special relationship with God, all help to account for the higher rate of high total PDI scores observed for the Pentecostal group. Table 44: Maternal religious affiliation and total PDI scores in young adulthood High total PDI scores in young adulthood Maternal religious n %Case Model 1 Model 2 affiliation Unadj OR Adj OR (95%CI) (95%CI) No religion 453 10.8 1 1 Catholic 966 10.9 1.00 1.02 (0.70,1.44) (0.71,1.46) Anglican 968 13.1 1.24 1.27 (0.88,1.77) (0.89,1.80) Other Christian 708 10.0 0.92 0.95 (0.63.1.35) (0.65,1.40) Pentecostal 84 22.6 2.41** 2.56** (1.33,4.35) (1.41.4.64) a Other 61 9.8 0.90 0.89 (0.37.2.20) (0.36,2.19) No answer 94 18.1 1.82 1.94* (1.00,3.33) (1.06,3.55) Total 3334 11.8 Reference group is no religion *P = < 0.05 **P = < 0.01 Model 2: Adjusted for maternal education, and parents remaining together until adulthood 162 Independent associations between religiosity, religious background, and delusional ideation in young adulthood Paranormal ideation Being unsure of, as well as endorsement of non-traditional R/S beliefs, were each found to be positively associated with paranormal ideation (Unsure – adjusted OR = 1.35; Yes – adjusted OR = 4.11), while young adult church attendance on an infrequent basis was found to be negatively associated with this same outcome (Adjusted OR = 0.70). Non-traditional R/S beliefs were adjusted for young adult church attendance and potential confounders (gender, cannabis and other substance use, quality of neighbourhood, and parents remaining together until young adulthood) to determine the independent effect of non-traditional R/S beliefs on paranormal ideation. Those who are unsure whether or not they believe in a spiritual or higher power other than God were found to be 1.40 times more likely (95%CI: 1.10,1.80), and those who endorsed this belief were observed to be 4.23 times (95%CI: 3.42,5.24) more likely, to score in the upper decile of paranormal ideation than those who reject non-traditional R/S beliefs. Religious ideation Since church attendance in young adulthood and the three measures of maternal religiosity were found to be positively associated with religious ideation in young adulthood, additional multivariable logistic regression models were run to determine the independent effects of each of these influences on religious ideation. In regard to frequency of young adult church attendance (see Model 1a for unadjusted odds ratios), adjustment for maternal church attendance led to a substantial reduction in the odds ratios for both infrequent and weekly church attendance (Monthly or less - adjusted OR = 3.11; 95%CI: 2.21,4.38 and Weekly – adjusted OR = 26.5; 95%CI: 18.4,38.4). Adjustment for maternal belief in God had a smaller effect (Monthly or less adjusted OR = 3.83; 95%CI:2.77,5.31 and Weekly – adjusted OR = 37.1; 95%CI:26.8,51.2). Adjustment for both of these influences simultaneously made little difference beyond that made by adjustment for maternal church attendance alone (Monthly or less – adjusted OR = 3.09; 95%CI: 2.21,4.38 and Weekly – adjusted OR = 26.4; 95%CI: 18.2,38.2) (these adjustments are not shown in Table 45). Adjustment for all of these influences as well as potential confounders yielded the results provided in Model 2a, Table 45. It can seen that after adjustment for maternal church attendance and belief in God, and potential confounders, the odds for religious ideation reduces by approximately one quarter for young adults who attend church less than weekly, 163 and by approximately one third for weekly attenders. Thus, young adult church attendance has a strong positive association with religious ideation that is independent of maternal church attendance and maternal belief in God Once maternal belief in God was adjusted for young adult church attendance, the significant positive association with religious ideation (Model 1b) became statistically insignificant (Adjusted OR = 1.36; 95%CI: 0.89,2.09) (not shown in Table 45). Similarly, the effect from maternal belief in God disappeared altogether after adjustment for maternal church attendance (Adjusted OR = 1.37; 95%CI: 0.91,2.07) (not shown in Table 45). After adjustment for both of these influences and potential confounders, the odds ratio for religious ideation from maternal belief in God reduces to 1.12 (shown in Model 2b in Table 45). Thus, maternal belief in God has no independent effect on religious ideation in young adulthood. In regard to maternal church attendance (see Model 1c for unadjusted odds ratios), adjustment for young adult church attendance led to a considerable attenuation of effect (Monthly or less Adjusted OR = 1.57; 95%CI: 1.10,2.24 and Weekly Adjusted OR = 2.07; 95%CI:1.45,2.95), while adjustment for maternal belief in God led to a comparatively modest reduction in effect (Monthly or less Adjusted OR = 1.98; 95%CI: 1.42,2.77 and Weekly Adjusted OR = 7.66; 95%CI: 5.74,10.2) (not shown in Table 45). After adjustment for both of these variables and potential confounders in the one multivariable model (see Model 2c in Table 45), offspring of mothers who attended church infrequently are 1.54 times, and offspring of mothers who attended church on a weekly basis are two times more likely, to endorse both religious ideation items than those whose mothers never attended church. Thus, young adult church attendance and maternal church attendance each has a strong positive influence on young adult religious ideation, that is independent of one another, as well as maternal belief in God. 164 Table 45: Independent associations between maternal and young adult church attendance, maternal belief in God, and religious ideation in young adulthood Religious ideation in young adulthood Religiosity variable n % Case Model 1 Model 2 a,b,c Unadj OR Adj OR (95%CI) (95%CI) a Young adult church attendance Never 2250 3.9 1 1 Monthly or less 454 14.0 4.01*** 3.12*** (2.91,5.53) (2.21,4.40) Weekly 243 61.2 39.0*** 26.01*** (28.4,53.6) (17.8,38.1) Total 3334 10.0 b Maternal belief in God No/unsure 664 4.5 1 1 Yes 2670 11.4 2.72*** 1.12 (1.85,3.99) (0.72,1.74) Total 3334 10.0 c Maternal church attendance Never 1938 4.5 1 1 Monthly or less 769 9.1 2.10*** 1.54* (1.52,2.92) (1.07,2.22) Weekly 627 28.2 8.27*** 2.04*** (6.28,10.9) (1.41,2.96) Total 3334 10.0 Reference group is never attends church *P = < 0.05 ***P = < 0.001 Model 2 a: Adjusted for maternal belief in God, church attendance, education, age, race and alcohol use and parents being together in young adulthood Model 2 b: Adjusted for maternal and young adult church attendance, maternal age and education, race and parents remaining together in young adulthood Model 2 ,c: Adjusted for maternal belief in God, age, and education, race, young adult church attendance, alcohol use, and parents remaining together in young adulthood In regard to maternal religious affiliation (see Table 46), the increased risk for delusional ideation among offspring of Catholic mothers in the unadjusted model (Model 1) disappears after adjustment for maternal church attendance (Model 2) and for belief in God (Adjusted OR = 0.99: 95%CI:0.59,1.66). The strong association between a Pentecostal background and religious ideation however, persists after adjustment for maternal church attendance (Model 2) and for maternal belief in God (Model 3). Once both of these maternal influences, young adult church attendance, and potential confounders were entered into a single model (Model 4), offspring of Pentecostal mothers are 4.5 times more likely to endorse both religious ideation items than those whose mothers were not affiliated with a religion in the prenatal period. Thus, a Pentecostal background makes a very strong contribution to religious ideation in young adulthood that is independent of maternal church attendance and belief in God, and 165 frequency of young adult church attendance. The similar pattern observed for offspring of mothers who refused to answer the religious affiliation suggests that these mothers are likely to have had strong ties to some religion and/or to hold strong religious beliefs. Table 46: Independent associations between maternal religious affiliation and religious ideation in young adulthood Religious ideation in young adulthood Maternal n % Case Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Religious affiliation Unadj OR Adj OR Adj OR Adj OR (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) No religion 453 4.6 1 1 1 1 Catholic 966 8.2 1.83* 0.99 1.42 1.11 (1.12,3.00) (0.59,1.66) (0.85,2.37) (0.63,1.98) Anglican 968 5.6 1.21 1.12 1.04 1.25 (0.72,2.04) (0.66,1.89) (0.62,1.76) (0.71,2.21) Other Christian 708 15.8 3.87*** 2.10** 3.10*** 1.42 (2.39,6.26) (1.26,3.48) (1.89,5.10) (0.80,2.52) Pentecostal 84 42.9 15.4*** 4.73*** 11.7*** 4.50*** (8.34,28.5) (2.45,9.15) (6.21,22.0) (2.07,9.77) a Other 61 16.4 4.03** 2.92* 3.33** 2.61* (1.80,9.04) (1.26,6.79) (1.47,7.52) (1.01,6.75) No answer 94 24.5 6.66*** 3.02** 5.09*** 3.60*** (3.50,12.7) (1.53,5.97) (2.64,9.82) (1.65,7.86) Total 3334 10.0 Reference group is no religious affiliation *P = < 0.05 ** P = < 0.01 ***P = < 0.001 a: Includes non-Christian, and non-defined religions Model 2: Adjusted for maternal church attendance Model 3: Adjusted for maternal belief in God Model 4: Adjusted for maternal church attendance, belief in God and education, young adult church attendance, and parents remaining together in young adulthood. Total PDI scores Since young adult belief in God, belief in a spiritual or higher power and a Pentecostal background were all found to be positively association with total PDI scores, multivariable logistic regression models were used to assess the independent effects from each of these factors. All of these results are shown in Table 47. Firstly, the positive association between young adult belief in God and high total PDI scores strengthens after adjustment for non-traditional R/S beliefs (Model 2a), and after the addition of potential confounders into the one model (Model 3a). Those who believe in God are over twice as likely to have high total PDI scores as those who reject this belief. This 166 strong positive association is independent of non-traditional R/S beliefs and cannabis and other substance use. It also noteworthy that the association between being uncertain about believing in God and total PDI scores does not become statistically significant after adjustment for belief in a spiritual or higher power other than God (see Model 2a) as it did when belief in God was adjusted for cannabis use alone (reported in Table 29). Since cannabis use and other substance use are both negatively related to belief in God, while belief in a spiritual or higher power is positively related to both of these factors, the pattern observed in Table 29 for those who are unsure or believe in God would have been due to the effect from belief in a spiritual or higher power not being taken into account. Table 47 shows that those who endorse non-traditional R/S beliefs are around 2.6 times more likely than those who reject this belief to have total PDI scores, after belief in God and potential confounders are taken into account (Model 3b). Thus, the independent contribution of belief in a spiritual or higher power other than God to high total PDI scores is only slightly higher that that observed for belief in God. In regard to maternal religious affiliation Table 47 shows that after adjustment for belief in God (Model 2c), for belief in a spiritual or higher power other than God (Model 3c), and for both of these beliefs and potential confounders, offspring of Pentecostal mothers are 2.4 times more likely than offspring of mothers with no religious affiliation at entry to the study, to have total high PDI scores. Thus, a Pentecostal background makes a contribution to this outcome that is independent of traditional and non-traditional R/S beliefs, and other social factors. 167 Table 47: Independent associations between young adult beliefs, maternal religious affiliation and total PDI scores High total PDI scores Religiosity variable n % Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Case Unadj OR Adj OR a,b,c Adj OR a,b,c Adj OR c (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) a Young adult belief in God No 815 9.0 1 1 1 - Unsure 927 10.9 1.24 1.20 1.39 - (0.90,1.71) (0.86,1.68) (0.98,1.98) Yes 1592 13.8 1.63** 1.80*** 2.16*** - (1.23,2.15) (1.36,2.40) (1.60,2.90) Total 3334 11.8 Young adult belief in a b spiritual or higher power No 1683 9.2 1 1 1 - Unsure 834 8.2 0.87 0.97 0.96 - (0.65,1.18) (0.70,1.34) (0.69,1.33) Yes 817 20.9 2.61*** 2.87*** 2.57*** - (2.06,3.30) (2.24,3.68) (1.98,3.37) Total 3334 11.8 Maternal religious affiliation No religion 453 10.8 1 1 1 1 Catholic 966 10.9 1.00 0.92 1.06 1.01 (0.70,1.44) (0.64,1.32) (0.74,1.53) (0.69,1.47) Anglican 968 13.1 1.24 1.20 1.29 1.30 (0.88,1.77) (0.85.1.71) (0.91,1.85) (0.90,1.88) Other Christian 708 10.0 0.92 0.84 1.00 1.01 (0.63.1.35) (0.57,1.24) (0.68,1.48) (0.68,1.51) Pentecostal 84 22.6 2.41** 2.00* 2.78** 2.38** (1.33,4.35) (1.10,3.64) (1.52,5.09) (1.27,4.46) Other 61 9.8 0.90 0.84 1.03 0.99 (0.37.2.20) (0.34,2.06) (0.42,2.54) (0.39,2.51) No answer 94 18.1 1.82 1.63 1.95* 1.73 (1.00,3.33) (0.89,2.99) (1.05,3.60) (0.92,3.27) Total 3334 11.8 Reference group is never attends church *P = < 0.05 **P = < 0.01 ***P = < 0.001 Model 2a : adjusted for belief in a spiritual or higher power Model 3a: adjusted for belief in a spiritual or higher power, young adult cannabis and other substance use Model 2b: adjusted for young adult belief in God Model 3b: adjusted for belief in God, cannabis use and drug use, quality of neighbourhood, and parents remaining together in young adulthood Model 2c: adjusted for young adult belief in God Model 3c: adjusted for belief in a spiritual or higher power Model 4c: adjusted for belief in God, belief in a spiritual or higher power, cannabis use, and parents remaining together in young adulthood 168 Summary of findings on young adult delusional ideation The findings related to delusional ideation identify both young adult religiosity and religious background as being strongly connected to delusional ideation, albeit in contrasting ways (see Table 48 below). Young adult church attendance, as well as the churchgoing behaviour of mothers in their children’s early years appear to have a strong influence on the sense of relationship young adults believe they have with God (religious ideation). However, there appears to be no relationship between weekly church attendance by either young adults or their mothers in their childhood years, and other delusional domains that are not directly related to religiosity, such as disturbed and suspicious ideation. By contrast, young adults who believe in a spiritual or higher power are much more likely than those who reject this belief, to have high levels of disturbed, suspicious, and paranormal ideation, as well as high total PDI scores. Pentecostal churches stand out as the only Christian affiliation under examination that is linked to high total PDI scores in young adulthood. The Church of England also appears to differ markedly from all other religious affiliation groups in that it is the only religious affiliation under study that is not linked to religious ideation in young adulthood. 169 Table 48: Summary of main findings for associations between young adult religiosity, religious background, and delusional ideation Main associations with young adult delusional ideation Young adult religiosity Disturbed Suspicious Paranormal Religious Total PDI Belief in God Null Null Null N/A Positive Belief in spiritual or Positive Positive Positive Negative Positive higher power Monthly or less church Null Null Negative Positive Null attendance Weekly church Null Null Null Positive Null attendance Religious background a Maternal belief in God Null Null Null Positive Null Maternal weekly church Null Null Null Positive Null attendance Religious affiliation Null Null Null Positive for: Positive for: Pentecostal Pentecostal Other b Christian b Catholic Null for: Null for: Anglican Catholic Anglican Other Christian N/A: not applicable since belief in God was not examined for its connection to religious ideation a: Confounded by maternal church attendance and mediated by young adult church attendance b: Confounded by maternal belief in God and maternal church attendance Finally, sensitivity analyses revealed that missing data for potential confounder variables did not bias the estimates reported throughout this section, except where specified in the discussion of particular results. All of the delusional ideation analyses were repeated with the exclusion of those young adults who had borderline thought problems in adolescence, with no reduction in effect being observed. Thus pre-existing thought disturbance in the adolescent period does not explain any of the significant associations observed between young adult religiosity or religious background, and any of the four domains of delusional ideation or high total PDI scores. 170 Section 4: Religiosity and antisocial behaviour The following section reports on the findings from logistic regression analyses examining associations between both young adult religiosity and religious background, and externalising behaviour (a scale aggregating symptoms of intrusiveness, aggression and delinquency) among young adult females and males. A range of potential confounders were identified for these analyses (see Appendix H, Tables H1 and H2). Young adult religiosity and antisocial behaviour Young adult belief in God From the unadjusted model (Model 1) in Table 49, it can be seen that females who believe in God appear to be significantly less likely than those who reject this belief to be antisocial in their behaviour, and that the negative association for those who are uncertain about God is not statistically significant. Adjustment for each of the factors identified as potential confounders, including young adult educational level (Model 2) and parents remaining together until adulthood (Model 3) makes little difference to the effect from female belief in God, although the statistical significance of this association changes from moderate to weak in Models 2 and 3. After adjustment for both of these factors in the one model (Model 4) young female adults who believe in God appear to have a 0.71 chance of reporting antisocial behaviour compared to those who reject this belief, with this reduced risk for antisocial behaviour being weakly significant. A sensitivity analysis revealed however, that once females who had mean values substituted for missing potential confounder data were excluded from Model 5, the negative associations between being unsure about God and believing in God and externalising behaviour among females were both statistically significant (Unsure – adjusted OR = 0.69; 95%CI: 0.50,0.97 and Yes – adjusted OR = 0.67; 95%CI: 0.50,0.90). Missing values for the variable parents remaining together accounted for this change. Thus, it would seem that it is non-rejection of God that is more important than believing in God, in terms of having a reduced likelihood for antisocial behaviour among females. 171 Table 49: Traditional beliefs and antisocial behaviour among young adult females Antisocial behaviour among females in young adulthood Belief in God n % Case Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Unadj OR Adj OR Adj OR Adj OR (95% CI) (95% CI) (95% CI) No 375 27.7 1 1 1 1 Unsure 524 22.7 0.77 0.77 0.77 0.77 (0.56,1.04) (0.56,1.04) (0.56,1.04) (0.56,1.04) Yes 892 21.0 0.69** 0.70* 0.71* 0.71* (0.52,0.91) (0.53,0.92) (0.53,0.94) (0.54,0.94) Total 1791 22.9 Reference group is no belief * P = < 0.05 **P = < 0.01 Model 2: Adjusted for young adult education Model 3: Adjusted for parents remaining together until adulthood Model 4: Adjusted for young adult education, and parents remaining together until adulthood By contrast, Table 50 shows that belief in God is unrelated to antisocial behaviour among young adult males, with no significant difference being observed between those who reject this belief and those who are either unsure, or do believe in God. Table 50: Traditional beliefs and antisocial behaviour among young adult males Antisocial behaviour among young adult males Belief in God n % Case Model 1 Unadj OR (95%CI) No 445 24.0 1 Unsure 417 22.1 0.89 (0.65,1.23) Yes 727 19.7 0.77 (0.58,1.03) Total 1589 21.5 Reference group is no belief Significance level set at P = < 0.05 Young adult belief in a spiritual or higher power Non-traditional beliefs appear to place both females (Table 51) and males (Table 52) at greater risk for antisocial behaviour. Table 51 shows that young adult females who endorse a belief in a spiritual or higher power than other God are 1.76 times more likely to report high levels of antisocial behaviour than their non-believing counterparts (Model 1). There is little 172 change in this association after adjustment for quality of neighbourhood in young adulthood (see Model 2) or for parents remaining together until young adulthood (Model 3), or for both of these influences (Model 4). The repeating of Model 2, with the exclusion of those females who had borderline externalising behaviour in adolescence made no appreciable difference to this association (OR = 1.70; 95%CI: 1.28,2.25). Table 51: Non-traditional beliefs and antisocial behaviour among young adult females Antisocial behaviour among females in young adulthood Belief in a n % Case Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 spiritual or Unadj OR Adj OR Adj OR Adj OR higher power (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) No 792 19.2 1 1 1 1 Unsure 481 21.8 1.18 1.19 1.16 1.18 (0.89,1.55) (0.90,1.58) (0.88,1.54) (0.89,1.56) Yes 518 29.5 1.76*** 1.72*** 1.72*** 1.69*** (1.36,2.29) (1.32,2.23) (1.33,2.24) (1.30,2.19) Total 1791 22.9 Reference group is no belief *** P = < 0.001 Model 2: Adjusted for quality of neighbourhood Model 3: Adjusted for parents remaining together until adulthood Model 4: Adjusted for quality of neighbourhood and parents remaining together until adulthood Similar to the pattern observed for females, males who endorse non-traditional beliefs are almost twice as likely as those males who reject these beliefs, to report high levels of antisocial behaviour (Table 52). After adjustment for potential confounders of this association, including parents remaining together until adulthood (Model 2) and quality of neighbourhood (Model 3) and both of these variables simultaneously (Model 4), there is little attenuation of effect. After re-running Model 4 with the exclusion of males who had borderline externalising behaviour in adolescence, the change of effect is small (Adjusted OR = 1.79; 95%CI:1.29,2.48). This result suggests that the association between non-traditional R/S beliefs and externalising behaviour cannot be explained by young adult males with a predisposition towards antisocial behaviour being disproportionately attracted to non-traditional R/S beliefs. 173 Table 52: Non-traditional beliefs and antisocial behaviour among young adult males Antisocial behaviour among young adult males Belief in a n % Case Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 spiritual or Unadj OR Adj OR Adj OR Adj OR higher power (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) No 904 18.4 1 1 1 1 Unsure 372 21.8 1.24 1.24 1.24 1.24 (0.92,1.67) (0.92,1.67) (0.91,1.68) (0.91,1.68) Yes 313 30.4 1.94*** 1.89*** 1.89*** 1.86*** (1.44,2.60) (1.41,2.54) (1.40,2.56) (1.37,2.51) Total 1589 21.5 Reference group is no belief *** P = < 0.001 Model 2: Adjusted for parents remaining together until young adulthood Model 3: Adjusted for quality of neighbourhood in young adulthood Model 4: Adjusted for parents remaining together and quality of neighbourhood in young adulthood Young adult church attendance Church attendance on a monthly or less basis appears to have no relationship with externalising behaviour among females. However, weekly attendance is negatively and significantly associated with externalising behaviour (see Model 1, Table 53) prior to adjustment for the one potential confounder identified for this association. Following adjustment for parents remaining together over the course of the young adult’s life (Model 2), this association fails to reach statistical significance. Thus, weekly church attendance among females appears to have no association with lower rates of antisocial behaviour, after the influence of their parents remaining together over the course of their lives is taken into account. 174 Table 53: Church attendance and antisocial behaviour among young adult females Antisocial behaviour among females in young adulthood Church n % Case Model 1 Model 2 attendance Unadj OR Adj OR (95%CI) (95%CI) Never 1368 23.5 1 1 Monthly or less 266 23.7 1.01 1.03 (0.74,1.37) (0.76,1.41) Weekly 157 15.9 0.61* 0.66 (0.39,0.96) (0.42,1.04) Total 1791 22.9 Reference group is never attends church *P = < 0.05 Model 2: Adjusted for parents remaining together until adulthood Similar to the pattern observed for females, infrequent church attendance among males has no association with borderline externalising behaviour, but weekly church attendance is significantly associated with lower rates of externalising behaviour. However, unlike the results for females, Table 54 shows that males who attend church on a weekly basis are much less likely to report high levels of antisocial behaviour than those who never attend church, after adjustment for potential confounders, maternal age (Model 2) and parents remaining together across the young adult’s life (Model 3). Once both of these factors are considered simultaneously (Model 4), this association remains moderately significant. Table 54: Church attendance and antisocial behaviour among young adult males Antisocial behaviour among males in young adulthood Church n % Case Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 attendance Unadj OR Adj OR Adj OR Adj OR (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) Never 1209 22.7 1 1 1 1 Monthly or less 280 21.5 0.93 0.95 0.97 0.98 (0.67,1.29) (0.69,1.32) (0.70,1.34) (0.71,1.37) Weekly 120 9.2 0.34** 0.35** 0.35** 0.36** (0.18,0.65) (0.18,0.66) (0.19,0.67) (0.19,0.68) Total 1589 21.5 Reference group is never attends church ** P = < 0.01 Model 2: Adjusted for maternal age Model 3: Adjusted for parents remaining together until young adulthood Model 4: Adjusted for maternal age and parents remaining together until young adulthood. 175 Religious background and antisocial behaviour in young adulthood Similar to the findings related to anxiety/depression, religious background during the young adult’s early life appears to have little connection to antisocial behaviour in young adulthood. Considering maternal belief in God, Table 55 shows that rates of borderline externalising behaviour do not differ according to whether young adult females or males were offspring of a mother believed in God during the prenatal period. Maternal weekly church attendance too, seems to have no relationship with female externalising behaviour in young adulthood. However, a weak negative association is evident for males from their mothers having believed in God. Once adjustment was made for potential confounders, maternal age and parents remaining together until adulthood, this association failed to reach statistical significance (adjusted OR = 0.75; 95%CI: 0.53,1.06). For the analyses related to maternal religious affiliation, the five-category religious affiliation variable was used. No significant associations are evident for borderline externalising behaviour for any of the religious affiliation groups for females or males. Thus, religious background, as assessed by maternal religiosity in the young adult’s early years, appears to be unrelated to rates of borderline externalising behaviour in young adulthood. 176 Table 55: Religious background and antisocial behaviour among young adult females and males Antisocial behaviour in young adulthood Females Males Religious n % Case Unadj OR n % Case Unadj OR background (95%CI) (95%CI) Maternal belief in God at entry to the study No/Don’t know 353 22.7 1 322 23.0 1 Yes 1438 22.9 1.02 1267 21.2 0.90 (0.77,1.34) (0.67,1.20) Total 1791 22.9 1589 21.5 Maternal church attendance in early years Never 1039 23.5 1 930 22.2 1 Monthly or less 423 24.8 1.08 348 24.4 1.14 (0.83,1.40) (0.85,1.52) a Weekly 329 18.5 0.74 311 16.4 0.69* (0.54,1.01) (0.49,0.97) Total 1791 22.9 1589 21.5 Maternal religious affiliation No religion 229 20.1 1 223 23.8 1 Catholic 513 26.3 1.42 465 20.9 0.84 (0.97,2.07) (0.58,1.24) Anglican 533 21.6 1.09 449 23.6 0.99 (0.75,1.61) (0.68,1.45) b Other Christian 436 23.2 1.20 370 18.6 0.74 (0.81,1.78) (0.49,1.10) c Other groups 80 16.3 0.77 82 20.7 0.84 (0.39,1.52) (0.45,1.55) Total 1791 22.9 1589 21.5 Reference categories: no belief; no church attendance; no religious affiliation * P = <0.05 a: No longer significant after adjustment for maternal age and parents remaining together until adulthood b: Includes Other Christian religions and Pentecostals c: Includes non-Christians, those who refused to respond to the religious affiliation item, and non-defined religion Independent associations between religiosity, religious background, and antisocial behaviour in young adulthood Following the identification of positive associations between non-traditional R/S beliefs and antisocial behaviour, and the initial negative associations between traditional R/S beliefs (for females) and church attendance (for females and males) and this same outcome, the following section reports on the multivariable logistic regression analyses performed in order to determine the independent associations between these aspects of religiosity and antisocial behaviour in young adulthood. 177 Belief in God and antisocial behaviour among young adult females Table 56 shows that after adjustment for young adult belief in a spiritual or higher power (Model 2) the negative association between belief in God and antisocial behaviour fails to reach statistical significance. However, the negative association between being unsure about believing in God becomes statistically significant. Adjustment for females’ church attendance (Model 3) makes little change to the associations observed for infrequent and weekly church attenders in Model 1. A similar pattern emerges when adjustment is restricted to maternal church attendance (Model 4). Once all of these influences are taken into account, as well as potential confounders (Model 5), belief in God appears to have no relationship with externalising behaviour for females, while being unsure about God has a weak negative relationship. These results for the unsure and belief groups identify the complex relationship that can emerge when two different R/S beliefs are considered simultaneously, especially when one form of belief has a strong positive relationship, and the other a negative relationship, with an outcome of interest. These results suggest that once non-traditional R/S beliefs are taken into account, it is a non-rejection of God that reduces the risk for high levels of antisocial behaviour among females. Table 56: Independent association between traditional beliefs and female antisocial behaviour Antisocial behaviour among females in young adulthood Young adult n % Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5 belief in God Case Unadj OR Adj OR Adj OR Adj OR Adj OR (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) No 375 27.7 1 1 1 1 1 Don’t know 524 22.7 0.77 0.71* 0.76 0.77 0.71* (0.56,1.04) (0.51,0.98) (0.56,1.03) (0.56,1.04) (0.51,0.98) Yes 892 21.0 0.69** 0.76 0.71* 0.72* 0.75 (0.52,0.91) (0.57,1.01) (0.52,0.96) (0.53,0.96) (0.55,1.03) Total 1791 22.9 Reference group is no belief in God * P = < 0.05 ** P = < 0.01 Model 2: Adjusted for belief in a spiritual or higher power other than God Model 3: Adjusted for church attendance Model 4: Adjusted for maternal church attendance Model 5: Adjusted for belief in a spiritual or higher power, young adult and maternal church attendance, young adult education, and parents remaining together until adulthood 178 Belief in a spiritual or higher power and antisocial behaviour among young adults Findings from the multivariable logistic regression models used to determine the independent effect of non-traditional R/S beliefs on antisocial behaviour among young adult females is shown below in Table 57. Adjustment for belief in God (Model 2), for frequency of church attendance (Model 3), and maternal church attendance (Model 4) does little to attenuate the positive association between non-traditional R/S beliefs and antisocial behaviour among females. Once all of these factors are taken into account, as well as potential confounders of this association (Model 5), belief in a spiritual or higher power emerges as a strong independent predictor of externalising behaviour for females. Belief in God, young adult church attendance, and maternal church attendance in childhood appear to have little influence in moderating the effect on externalising behaviour from non-traditional R/S beliefs. Table 57: Independent association between non-traditional beliefs and female antisocial behaviour Antisocial behaviour among females in young adulthood Belief in a n % Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5 spiritual or Case Unadj OR Adj OR Adj OR Adj OR Adj OR higher (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) power No 792 19.2 1 1 1 1 1 Unsure 481 21.8 1.18 1.26 1.13 1.12 1.24 (0.89,1.56) (0.93,1.72) (0.85,1.52) (0.85,1.50) (0.90,1.71) Yes 518 29.5 1.76*** 1.78*** 1.71*** 1.71*** 1.69*** (1.36,2.28) (1.35,2.34) (1.30,2.24) (1.32,2.23) (1.28,2.25) Total 1791 22.9 Reference group is no belief *** P = < 0.001 Model 2: Adjusted for belief in God Model 3: Adjusted for church attendance Model 4: Adjusted for maternal church attendance Model 5: Adjusted for belief in God, church attendance, maternal church attendance, quality of neighbourhood, and parents remaining together in young adulthood A similar pattern to that found for females is apparent for males in regard to the strong independent effect of non-traditional R/S beliefs on antisocial behaviour (see Table 58). After adjustment for belief in God (Model 2), frequency of church attendance (Model 3) and maternal church attendance (Model 4), males remain about twice as likely as those who do not endorse non-traditional R/S beliefs to report high levels of antisocial behaviour. Once all of these influences and potential confounders are entered into the one multivariable logistic 179 regression model (Model 5), there is only a slight reduction in the odds ratio from that observed in the unadjusted model (1.94 in Model 1 to 1.90 in Model 5). For males, belief in God appears to have a slight moderating influence over the effect from non-traditional beliefs on externalising behaviour, since adjustment for this belief alone led to a slight increase in the odds ratio for externalising behaviour (comparing Model 2 with Model 1). Table 58: Independent association between non-traditional beliefs and male antisocial behaviour Antisocial behaviour among males in young adulthood Belief in a n % Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5 spiritual or higher power Case Unadj OR Adj OR Adj OR Adj OR Adj OR (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) No 904 18.4 1 1 1 1 1 Don’t know 372 21.8 1.24 1.33 1.16 1.20 1.28 (0.92,1.67) (0.94,1.88) (0.86,1.56) (0.87,1.62) (0.90,1.83) Yes 313 30.4 1.94*** 2.00*** 1.90*** 1.91*** 1.90*** (1.44,2.60) (1.48,2.76) (1.41,2.55) (1.42,2.57) (1.39,2.59) Total 1589 21.5 Reference group is no belief *** P = < 0.001 Model 2: Adjusted for belief in God Model 3: Adjusted for young church attendance Model 4: Adjusted for maternal church attendance Model 5: Adjusted for belief in God, church attendance, young adult and maternal church attendance, quality of neighbourhood and parents remaining together in young adulthood Church attendance and antisocial behaviour among young adult males Since weekly church attendance was only found to be associated with externalising behaviour for males and not females (after adjustment for potential confounders), additional multivariable models were run to determine any change in effect for males once other dimensions of young adult religiosity were taken into account. As shown in Table 59, little change is observed after adjustment for non-traditional R/S beliefs (Model 2), or belief in God (Model 3), or maternal church attendance (Model 4). Once all of these factors are considered in the one model, along with potential confounders (Model 5), the association persists, although the statistical significance changes from moderated to weak. Thus, weekly church attendance among males makes a contribution to lower rates of antisocial behaviour that is independent of other R/S and social factors. 180 Table 59: Independent association between church attendance and antisocial behaviour among young adult males Antisocial behaviour among males in young adulthood Male n % Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5 frequency Case Unadj OR Adj OR Adj OR Adj OR Adj OR of church (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) (95%CI) attendance Never 1209 22.7 1 1 1 1 1 Monthly 280 21.5 0.93 0.98 0.98 0.95 1.08 or less (0.67,1.29) (0.70,1.36) (0.69,1.39) (0.68,1.35) (0.74,1.56) Weekly 120 9.2 0.34** 0.35** 0.36** 0.38** 0.41* (0.18,0.65) (0.19,0.67) (0.19,0.70) (0.19,0.75) (0.20,0.82) Total 1589 21.5 Reference group is never attends church *P = < 0.05 ** P = < 0.01 Model 2: Adjusted for belief in a spiritual power other than God Model 3: Adjusted for belief in God Model 4: Adjusted for maternal church attendance Model 5: Adjusted for belief in God, belief in a spiritual power other than God, maternal church attendance and age, and parents remaining together until adulthood Summary of findings on young adult antisocial behaviour Table 60 below provides an overview of the main findings observed for young adult externalising behaviour. Belief in a spiritual or higher power other than God appears to be a strong independent predictor of antisocial behaviour in young adulthood for both females and males. Prior externalising behaviour does not appear to confound this association for either gender, which tends to undermine the notion that these effects are due to persons with a predisposition towards antisocial behaviour being more likely than others to adopt non- traditional R/S beliefs. Non-rejection of God appears to have a modest influence on antisocial behaviour for females rather than belief in God per se, since being unsure about believing in God had a weak negative association with externalising behaviour that persisted after other R/S and social factors were taken into account. For males, belief in God appears to be unrelated to externalising behaviour, whereas weekly church attendance is weakly associated with lower levels of antisocial behaviour. 181 Table 60: Summary table of main associations found between religiosity and young adult externalising behaviour Young adult externalising behaviour Dimension of Indicator Females Males religiosity a Young adult religiosity Belief in God Negative Null Belief in a spiritual or Positive Positive higher power Weekly church b Negative Negative attendance Religious background Maternal belief in God Null Null Weekly maternal church c Null Negative attendance Maternal religious Null Null affiliation a No longer significant after adjustment for belief in a higher power, church attendance, maternal church attendance, young adult education, and parents remaining together until young adulthood b No longer significant after adjustment for young adult education and parents remaining together until adulthood c No longer significant after adjustment for maternal age and parents remaining together until adulthood Finally, sensitivity analyses were conducted to ensure that the assigning of mean values for missing potential confounder data had not biased the estimates reported in this section of results. Little change of effect was observed for any of these analyses, except for those discussed earlier in this section in relation to belief in God and female externalising behaviour. 182 Chapter Seven: Discussion This chapter discusses the current study’s findings under eight main headings. The first five headings correspond to the main areas of interest in this thesis, including young adult religiosity, its link to religious background, and connections between young adult religiosity, religious background, and anxiety/depression, delusional ideation, and externalising behaviour respectively. The remaining three headings mark discussion about the characteristics of those who endorse non-traditional R/S beliefs, a summary of the overall findings, and finally, the limitations of the current study. Young adult religiosity Rates of church attendance observed among the young adult sample are consistent with previous findings derived from Australian data. The ABS (2004b) found that around 23.5 per cent of the Australian population aged 18 years and over, had attended church in the three months prior to survey in 2002 (according to GSS 2002 data), similar to the 23 per cent of young adults who reported attending church either regularly or irregularly at the time of the MUSP 21-year follow-up (between 2001 and 2004). The rate of weekly church attendance found among the young adult sample (8.0%) is also similar to the estimated 8.8 per cent weekly church attendance for the general population in Australia during 2001 (Bellamy & Castle, 2004). The prevalence of traditional and non-traditional R/S beliefs deviates somewhat from that found from the Australian Community Survey (ACS) conducted between 1997 and 1998. The observed differences are likely due to the age of the MUSP sample, the fact that the sample is restricted to those born in Brisbane, Queensland, as well as the measures used in the ACS to assess R/S beliefs. The ACS questionnaires were administered to a national sample of people aged 15 years and over, with just 13 per cent of the sample being between aged between 15 and 25 years. The prevalence of R/S beliefs among the ACS sample is based on a single item, whereas the MUSP study included two separate measures of R/S beliefs. Among the current study sample, more of the young adults were found to endorse a belief in God (47.9%) than they did belief in a spiritual or higher power (24.5%), whereas the ACS found that belief in God was less common (33.0 %) than belief in “some sort of spirit or life force” (40.0%). The difference in the relative proportions of the current study and ACS samples who endorsed traditional and non-traditional R/S beliefs is likely to be attributable to a small or large extent on the inclusion of the phrase “other than God” in the item used in the current study to measure non-traditional R/S beliefs. The ACS data also revealed that 28 per cent of 183 the national Australian sample were either agnostic (17%) or did not believe in any sort of spirit, God or life force (11.0%). Approximately 15 per cent of the MUSP young adults were found to reject both traditional and non-traditional beliefs, and a similar proportion (15.2%) stated they were unsure about each of the beliefs under study (belief in God, and belief in a spiritual or higher power other than God) . Even though agnosticism and a response of “do not know” for a given belief do not amount to the same thing, it remains that similar results were found between these two studies in the proportion of the population who do not endorse either traditional or non-traditional R/S beliefs. The ACS data also indicates that 13 per cent of Australians in 1997/1998 reported that they engaged in personal prayer, 9 per cent practiced Eastern mediation, and 7 per cent engaged in psychic healing or used crystals. In the current study, the religious activities item was framed in such a way as to include “prayer, religious rituals, etc”. It is likely that the proportion of the current study sample who reported engaging in some sort of religious activities includes New Age and Eastern practices, as well as prayer. However, it is impossible to draw any comparison between the 35.2 per cent of the young adult sample who reported that they engage in either prayer or other religious ritual or activity (92.0% of churchgoers and 17.6% of non-churchgoers) and the rates of prayer, meditation, psychic and crystal healing reported by the ACS. The categories of religious activities considered by the ACS are not mutually exclusive and appear to have restricted the range of religious activities that respondents were able to endorse. The prevalence of non- traditional R/S beliefs found among the MUSP sample (24.5%) is fairly similar to the finding by Arnett and Jensen that 29.0 per cent of a young adult sample in the United States described themselves as having a non-religious belief in God, in spirituality, or individualised beliefs borrowed from witchcraft, Eastern religions, and popular culture. Together, the above discussion identifies the young adults in the MUSP sample as engaging in religious services at a rate that is similar to that of the Australian population, and as having a prevalence of non-traditional R/S beliefs that are similar to a young adult sample in the United States. Religious background and young adult religiosity Research question (1) aimed to determine links between young adult religiosity and religious background. The main findings indicate that both maternal belief in God and maternal church attendance are strongly associated with offspring belief in God and weekly church attendance in adulthood, and that these same factors appear to discourage the uptake of non-traditional R/S beliefs. Maternal belief in God and church attendance are both 184 connected to young adult uncertainty about God as well. Young adults who are uncertain about the existence of a spiritual or higher power other than God are just as likely to be offspring of mothers who believed in God as they are to be offspring of a mother who did not believe in God in their early years. Thus, while there is continuity in the religious beliefs and churchgoing behaviour of mothers and their offspring, discontinuity is also evident. The findings suggest that mothers’ religious beliefs and involvement with church organisations also predict their offspring’s tendency to question the existence of God and being open to the possibility that the divine is not God, but some sort of spiritual or higher power once they reach adulthood. This discontinuity between mother and child may well reflect population trends over recent decades. Observed declines in participation in religious services among most Christian denominations in Australia (while attendance at Charismatic churches have increased) suggest the questioning of the relevance of mainstream Christian teachings and practices by substantial numbers of the population. A proportion of the study mothers who believed in God in the early 1980s may well have begun to re-assess of the legitimacy of Church doctrine and authority, with this in turn influencing their offspring to question the notion of God and consider possible alternatives. In considering the influence of maternal belief in God and church attendance on R/S beliefs in adulthood, it also needs to be borne in mind that even though maternal belief in God and church attendance were found to be strong predictors of young adult belief in God, the odds ratios reported in Chapter Six that relate to these influences, are based on comparisons with young adults with no R/S beliefs, who report never attending church services, and those whose mothers rejected the notion of God, and who did not attend church services during the young adults’ early lives (reference groups). It is therefore worth noting that nearly half of all offspring of mothers who believed in God at entry to the study reported that they were either unsure (26.0%), or did not believe in God (20.5%), and that two fifths of offspring whose mothers attended church infrequently, stated that they were either unsure (25.7%), or did not believe in God (19.1%), once they reached adulthood. The general trend away from a traditional religious orientation that has been observed in numerous Western nations is evident among the MUSP sample, since around 80 per cent of the mothers of the young adult sample reported that they believed in God in the early 1980s, while less than half of all their young adult children reported believing in God in the early 2000s. In addition, one can only speculate as to whether a proportion of mothers might have held non-traditional R/S beliefs (that is, in a spiritual or higher power or some alternative belief) at the time the MUSP study commenced. These mothers may have made a decision to endorse a belief in God when completing survey forms administered at that time, 185 because no alternative R/S belief option was provided. Had the belief in a spiritual or higher power item that was included in the young adult questionnaire been presented to mothers at entry to the study, continuity or discontinuity between mother and offspring in regard to non- traditional R/S beliefs might have been detected. The findings related to maternal religious affiliation indicate that influences linked to religious doctrine and practices may be strongest for young adults raised by mothers affiliated with one of the Pentecostal churches at entry to the study. This particular group are set apart from other affiliation groups in terms of being more likely than the reference group to endorse traditional R/S beliefs, reject non-traditional R/S beliefs and attend church on a weekly basis in young adulthood. The strong emphasis placed on personal experience of the Holy Spirit within Pentecostal churches, as evidenced by their practice of speaking in tongues, may have long-term effects on children exposed to these particular beliefs and practices, such that they are much more likely to be committed to religion and to maintain a belief in God into adulthood. By contrast, offspring of Anglican mothers appear to be no different to those raised in no religion in terms of endorsing non-traditional R/S beliefs and attending church on a weekly basis in young adulthood. This may reflect the more liberal approach taken by the Anglican Church to religious orthodoxy. Offspring of Catholic mothers on the other hand, are less likely than offspring of unaffiliated mothers to endorse non-traditional R/S beliefs and more likely to attend church on a weekly basis in adulthood – again, no doubt influenced by the doctrine of the Catholic Church. However, offspring of Catholic and Anglican mothers share the same tendency to be unsure whether they believe in God, indicating that young adults exposed to Catholic and Anglican doctrines are more prone to question the existence of God than those born to mothers with no religious affiliation. Offspring of Anglican and Catholic mothers are also just as likely as offspring of mothers with no religious affiliation, to consider the possibility of the divine being something different to the idea promoted by traditional Church doctrine (being unsure about believing in a spiritual or higher power other than God). Since the sample of non-Christians in this study was small, and their attrition rate was higher than all other religious affiliation groups, caution needs to be exercised when interpreting the findings related to this group. It does appear however, that offspring of non- Christian mothers tend to be more likely to maintain traditional R/S beliefs and to reject non- traditional R/S beliefs in young adulthood, than offspring of mothers with no religious affiliation during the prenatal period. Overall, it would seem that offspring of mothers affiliated with one of the Pentecostal churches are the most likely, while offspring of Anglican mothers are the least likely, to maintain a traditional religious orientation into adulthood. 186 In combination, the study findings suggest a complex pattern of continuity and discontinuity between mother and child in relation to religiosity, and also suggest that attention to religious background is important for understanding patterns of traditional and non-traditional R/S beliefs and church attendance in young adulthood. Anxiety/depression in young adulthood In answering research question (2), measures of traditional religion including traditional R/S beliefs, church attendance, and religious background all appear to have no association with young adult anxiety/depression, while non-traditional R/S beliefs are positively associated with this outcome. The implications of the lack of associations between young adult traditional R/S beliefs and church attendance, and anxiety/depression warrant attention prior to discussion of the positive associations found for non-traditional R/S beliefs. The findings from this study suggest that for a large normal sample of young adults born in Brisbane, aged between 18 and 24 years, traditional R/S beliefs and involvement in religious services measured cross-sectionally, are not associated with either a decreased or increased likelihood of anxiety/depression. The notion that traditional religion is “bad” because it represents a hindrance to freedom of expression and freedom of choice is somewhat undermined by this finding. If this argument was sound, one would expect to find at least some evidence of higher rates of anxiety/depression among young adult churchgoers compared to non-churchgoers. The counter argument that traditional religion is “good” because it provides a buffer from stressful circumstances in day-to-day life is also unsupported by this study’s findings. For the current sample, there is no evidence of any overall “harm” or “benefit” to those young adults who either maintain a traditional belief in God, or attend church on a weekly or less frequent basis in relation to anxiety/depression. This study’s findings are similar to other Australian studies. Francis and Kaldor (2002) for example, found no differences in negative affect for either belief in God or church attendance. The findings differ however, from those derived from overseas studies, including four studies conducted between 1951 and 1984 and reviewed by Gartner (1996), 24 studies (spanning 1984 to 1999) identified in the review by McCullough and Larson (1999), and the more recent study by Baetz et al. (2004). All of these studies showed frequency of church attendance (or religious commitment) as having a negative association with depression. There are several possible reasons for the difference between this study’s findings and those obtained by these other studies. Firstly, this study relies on a summed score of symptoms of both anxiety and depression 187 while other studies have focussed their attention on depression. This could explain the discrepancy in results. However, the idea that anxiety is distinct from depression remains controversial. Primary care physicians report a high incidence of patients having symptoms of both anxiety and depression, and the ICD-10 (World Health Organization, 1993) includes mixed anxiety and depression as a distinct category of mental disorder (Leibowitz, 1993). Secondly, apart from the issue of disorder classification, consideration needs to be given to the comparability of findings from studies undertaken from the 1950s to the early 1990s and those undertaken in recent years. The religious landscape appears to have altered to such an extent in the past couple of decades that one can only speculate about the relevance of evidence gathered when levels of church attendance and religious affiliation were much higher than they are now. Of course, part of the reason that reviews of the literature on religion and spirituality rely on evidence from studies gathered more than 20 to 50 years ago is that both religion and spirituality have received comparatively little empirical attention within health research. Thirdly, the relative paucity of research into religion, spirituality and mental health in general (compared with that directed towards health-related behaviours, socioeconomic status, genetic influences and so on) means that comparison of the current findings with those found in previous studies is extremely problematic. Since previous studies involve very different sampling frames, methodologies, and socio-cultural contexts – “apples” end up being compared with “oranges”. In regard to sampling frames for example, the recent study by Baetz et al. (2004) involved a Canadian population sample of 18 years and over, whereas the study by Schapman and Inderbitzen-Nolan (2002) involved American youth aged between 13 and 18 years. The former found a negative relationship between frequency of church attendance and depression. The latter observed no association between either attendance at church, or religion classes, and depression, but did find that a negative correlation between church and religion class attendance and trait anxiety. Within the current study, findings are based on a combined measure of anxiety and depression and a sample ranging from 18 to 24 years of age, with no differences being found in anxiety/depression among young adults for either belief in God or frequency of church attendance. Thus, discrepancies in findings between studies may reflect differences in age of the samples under study, sampling frames, socio-cultural factors, and the measures used to assess levels of depression. However, despite the difficulties encountered when comparing results between studies, this study’s findings raise the question of whether traditional religion has any capacity to alleviate or prevent anxiety and depression among young adults in today’s societies. 188 Religiosity may have become such an individualised affair for young people, that involvement with religious organisations or traditional religious beliefs offer no real buffers from anxiety and depression, and thus their levels of anxiety/depression mirror those who have a secular orientation. Durkheim’s belief that involvement in the activities provided by religious organisations afforded individuals mental health benefits, by promoting social integration, and encouraging a sense of identification with a social group and group solidarity, may no longer apply in a contemporary setting. Arnett’s and Jensen’s (2002) observation that religion has become a “congregation of one” for young people in the United States may well be applicable to young Australian adults. Moreover, numerous aetiological factors have been identified in relation to anxiety/depression. If religious organisational membership no longer provides young adults with a real sense of group solidarity or identification with a particular religious group, it is plausible that their risk for anxiety and depression is no different to that of non-churchgoers. The findings from this study also suggest that what has been interpreted as “beneficial effects” from religiousness among the mentally and physically ill in relation to depression and anxiety (Corrigan, McCorkle, Schell et al., 2003), and from religiousness/spirituality in regard to depression (Baetz, Larson, Marcoux et al., 2002; Koenig, Cohen, Blazer et al., 1992; Tebbi, Mallon, Richards et al., 1987; Tepper, Rogers, Coleman et al., 2001) might be restricted to those who have significant health problems and thus not extend to normal populations. It is plausible that the “beneficial effects” on depression observed in these studies are due to a heightened focus on religious and spiritual matters and a greater commitment to R/S beliefs and practices as a way of coping with debilitating or terminal conditions; with these providing some sense of hope and meaning that science is unable to provide at times of personal crisis. In cases where negative associations have been observed between religiousness/spirituality and depression in cross-sectional studies, observed effects might rest on the circumstance that people who are severely depressed tend to state that they are not religious or spiritual, or that these dimensions are not important to them, because of their depressed state. It is possible that they had a religious and/or spiritual faith prior to their depression, and this loss of faith is symptomatic of their depression. In stark contrast to the null associations observed for traditional R/S beliefs and church attendance, non-traditional beliefs have been found in this study to be positively associated with anxiety/depression for both females and males. Prior anxiety/depression (in adolescence) was found to account for the association between non-traditional R/S beliefs and anxiety/depression for males. This suggests that anxiety/depression may well lead males to 189 adopt non-traditional R/S beliefs. However, prior anxiety/depression did not explain this association for females. These findings may provide some insight into the somewhat curious findings by Baetz et al. (2004) showing that self-descriptions of being “very religious/spiritual” were positively related, while church attendance was negatively related, to symptoms of depression among Canadians. The current study’s differentiation of traditional from non- traditional beliefs has allowed investigation into levels of anxiety/depression according to two contrasting forms of “religiousness/spirituality”. The differences found between these two forms of religiosity suggests that it might be those within the Canadian population who tend towards non-traditional forms of religiousness/spirituality, who account for the higher levels of depression among the proportion of the Canadian sample who described themselves as being “very spiritual/religious”. Since Baetz and colleagues used logistic regression analyses and did not rely on correlations between measures of depression and being religious/spiritual, differences in outcome were detectable for the “very spiritual/religious” group. No differences were observed between those who agreed that they were “moderately spiritual/religious” and those who reported being “not at all spiritual/religious”. It may be that the term “very spiritual/religious” is more likely to be endorsed by those whose beliefs are aligned with the New Spirituality, and that those who maintain a traditional approach to spirituality/religiousness are more moderate in the way they describe their level of spirituality/religiousness. Given that a proportion of people are known to have a negative reaction to the term religion, and others to the term spirituality, the placing of spirituality before religiousness (or vice versa) in survey items may influence the way some respondents answer these types of questions. Had the term “religiousness” been placed before the term “spirituality” in the survey item used in this study, a different pattern of results may have emerged. This possibility, as well as the fact that Baetz and colleagues found that those who reported weekly church attendance had lower levels of depression, provides support for the view that single measures of religiousness/spirituality serve to mask differences in outcome that might arise from different R/S orientations. The current study’s findings for non-traditional R/S beliefs and anxiety/depression contradicts the finding by Kaldor and colleagues (2004) in their study of Australians, that there was no difference in mental health from a summary measure of mental health status between those classified as having a traditional religious orientation and those categorised as having alternative spiritual or secular orientations. However, it needs to be borne in mind that Kaldor et al. (2004) speculated that the summary measure of mental health included in the SF12 (Ware, Kosinski, & Keller, 1996), which was used to assess mental health in their study, 190 may be inadequate to the task of assessing differences in mental health; whereas the current study used measures that directly assess symptoms of anxiety/depression. The age ranges and sampling frames also differ between these two Australian studies, with the former relying on a national Australian sample aged 15 years and over, and the MUSP sample being restricted to a large group of 18 to 24 year olds born in Queensland. Even though Kaldor and colleagues (2004) failed to find differences in mental health according to different R/S orientations, they did observe that a Buddhist/New Age orientation and psychic involvement were negatively correlated with satisfaction with life and a sense of security. They also found that those with these kinds of alternative approaches to spirituality had higher levels of optimism, purpose in life, and a sense of control. While together, these particular findings concerning the Buddhist/New Age orientation may appear to be contradictory, they seem to indicate that self-perceived sense of purpose and sense of control (aspects strongly promoted by the philosophical underpinnings of the New Spirituality) do not translate to higher levels of satisfaction with life, or a greater sense of security, compared to those who have a more tradition-oriented form of religiosity. The results from the current study tend to support these latter findings, by indicating that beliefs aligned with the New Spirituality might be causally linked to symptoms of anxiety and depression among females. It may be that the a-social orientation of the New Spirituality undermines mental and emotional wellbeing. The a-social orientation of non-religious varieties of spirituality can be conceived as having the potential to negatively influence mental and emotional wellbeing in a number of ways. Firstly, there is no continuity between the religious tradition of family, and ancestors, as well as country of origin, and the beliefs and practices associated with the New Spirituality. This discontinuity may tend to create a form of dispossession – a loss of connection with the culture of one’s origins. Even if individuals have one or more family members, relatives, or grandparents, or other ancestors whose beliefs and/or practices are aligned with those that are encompassed by the New Spirituality, the eclectic nature of the New Spirituality and thus its lack of affinity with any set of religious or national traditions, necessarily creates a form of cultural dissonance. Secondly, it is possible that with the onus of responsibility being placed on the individual within the New Spirituality, to achieve health, prosperity, and enlightenment for themselves, as well as the promise that this is possible, actually serves to promote the development of anxiety and depression when these impossible objectives fail to be met. While those with a traditional religious orientation have the opportunity to perceive life’s troubles as either God testing the virtuous, or a temporary stage of earthly suffering prior to achieving ultimate peace and salvation in the after-life, and those with an atheistic orientation can 191 explain their problems in purely scientific and objective terms, the New Spirituality approach offers no such comfort or exemption from blame. This approach emphasises the individual as needing to become aligned with the universal “spirit” or “power” in order to achieve physical, emotional, mental and spiritual health, prosperity and wellbeing. The ability or inability to achieve these aims inevitably rests with individuals themselves and may lead them to feel despondent, to conceive themselves as “failures”, and to feel alienated from others. There appears to be no evidence supporting the view that those with a non-traditional spiritual orientation lack social support, raising doubts that lack of social support is a plausible explanation for higher levels of anxiety/depression among those with non-traditional beliefs. The study by Corrigan et al. (2003) for example, found that those who saw “themselves as part of a larger spiritual force” had higher scores on objective measures of social inclusion than those with a religious orientation (based on “those participating in a community of people who gather around common ways of worshipping”). Numerous authors have also observed that those who align themselves with spirituality and not religion, tend to be involved in multiple group activities (Heelas, 1993; Roof, 1993; Woodhead, 1993; Zinnbauer, Pargament, & Scott, 1999). Even though individuals who embrace beliefs and practices associated with the New Spirituality might have extensive social interactions, with various individuals or groups of individuals being available to give material and/or emotional support, these forms of support may do little to alleviate a sense of personal failure or guilt. Indeed, fellow like-minded individuals may even reinforce the idea that anxious and depressed individuals are personally responsible for their circumstances. This possibility warrants empirical attention. Moreover, anxiety and depression among those who opt for a non-non-traditional R/S worldview might not arise from difficulties per se, but simply from the sense of isolation that comes from believing that one is on a “solitary journey”. This perception may mean that fellowship and interactions with others have no real value or importance in an ultimate sense. The lack of fixed norms, values or beliefs that are shared with others may create an obstacle to individuals gaining a feeling of belongingness and self-perceived status as an integral part of any particular group. In essence, this constitutes a social alienation “of the mind”. This explanation is consistent with Durkheim’s view that “magic” represents the beliefs and practices of those without a “real” religion or a “Church”, and lacks the capacity to “bind people together”. The words of one of Possamai’s (2000:369) New Age informants seems to encapsulate the potential for New Age beliefs to undermine a sense of group unity and solidarity and to set individuals apart from one another -“Because we’re all different, we’re all at different stages and we’re looking for different things”. 192 Religious conversion may also be at issue here. The findings raise the question of whether or not the group who believe in a spiritual or higher power other than God have higher levels of anxiety and depression than those who reject this belief, because of inner conflict related to their “conversion” to a non-traditional R/S orientation, from either having a non-religious background or having been affiliated with some religion or other in their developing years. This relates back to previous discussion about discontinuity between non- traditional forms of religiosity and the traditional religious orientation of one’s family and ancestors. The study by Spellman and colleagues (1971) indicates that converts have higher levels of anxiety than either regular church attenders or those categorised as having no religion, giving support to the argument by Beit-Hallahmi (2001:52-53) that religious conversion represents an attempt to “cope with reality” and is thus indicative of inner turmoil. Simmel’s “conflict of modern culture” also seems poignant, since he argued that the loss of faith in religious doctrine has steered people towards mysticism as a means to satisfy the religious urge. This loss of faith is exemplified by the shift away from traditional religious conceptions to alternative conceptions of the divine. The consequences of this undermining of faith may persist, regardless of the beliefs that might be adopted to revive, renew, or reinvigorate faith in something beyond the mundane. Indeed Possamai (2000:367) observed that New Agers appear to experience tension and conflict during their visits to diverse New Age and non-New Age groups like “born again” Christian, transcendental meditation, and Scientology groups, because they “want to find their own subjective religion”. Possamai (2000:367) also found that New Agers tend to deride any form of perceived dogmatism. This tendency to be suspicious of any authority outside the self may lead to an undermining of trust of any organisation or individual and thus give rise to a sense of social isolation. The possible repercussions for mental health and wellbeing from a general mistrust of others and the sense of social isolation this may engender are obvious if considered in Durkheimian terms. The science-driven society in which we now live de-emphasises the social, with biological and genetic influences being used to explain human thought, behaviour, illness, death and everything in between. The social thus appears to play little part in individual wellbeing within a biomedical framework, apart from its role in producing “environmental triggers”. An individual’s genetic make-up, attitude, beliefs, and health-related behaviours are constantly being promoted as the main determinants of morbidity and mortality, with modifications to all of these aspects being emphasised as being the means by which population health can be improved. Parallels can be drawn between this individualistic approach to health and wellbeing and the individualistic approach that is characteristic of the 193 New Spirituality. It too regards an individual’s own beliefs, attitudes, and behaviours as being the main determinant of his or her capacity to achieve physical, mental, emotional and spiritual wellbeing. It seems hardly surprising therefore, that people have continued to move away from socially-oriented religions to new religious forms that emphasise an individualistic approach – an approach that is fundamentally in keeping with that promoted by science, despite the fact that new religious forms and science diverge in the means and methods each employs for the attainment of health and wellbeing. Apart from the science-driven nature of society, its market-driven orientation has created the opportunity for everything to be commodified; spirituality, self-realisation, self- enlightenment, self-fulfilment, self-actualisation, and prosperity are all “products” being bought and sold in the “spiritual” marketplace. One or more, or all of these commodities are promoted by countless New Age/Human Potential entrepreneurs as being accessible and achievable through the various techniques, products, and “how-to” approaches they “sell” in seminars, workshops, books, audio-visual media and other materials. In essence, the New Age and Human Potential movements have succeeded in marketing personal happiness, fulfilment, and wellbeing as something that is transferable from entrepreneur to consumer via a simple financial transaction – as long as individuals put these techniques and ideas into practice. Even though pre-existing anxiety/depression (in adolescence) was found to explain the association between non-traditional beliefs and anxiety/depression in adulthood for males, this was not the case for females. While the lack of connection between prior anxiety/depression and belief in a spiritual or higher power for females tends to suggest the possibility of a causal association between non-traditional R/S beliefs and anxiety/depression, it is possible that anxiety and depression that develops during the transition between adolescence and young adulthood lead some females to adopt non-traditional R/S beliefs. The disenchanted may well be drawn to belief in a spiritual of higher power other than God because it frees them from the constraints imposed by religious doctrine, dogma, and authority, does not exclude anyone on the basis of religion or other characteristics, and provides a framework of belief that gives consideration to both human and environmental concerns. The notion that humankind has the right of “dominion” over the natural world – a central teaching within Christianity – is rejected outright within the New Spirituality – all things living and non-living are viewed as reflecting an underlying and “connected” spiritual reality. It would seem no coincidence that religions that emphasise the notion that the natural environment and human wellbeing and existence are inextricably linked (such as pagan religions, native religions, deep ecology, and so on) are gaining increasing numbers of 194 adherents at a time when numerous environmental crises are being faced at a global level. It may be that the higher levels of anxiety/depression found among those who endorse non- traditional R/S beliefs are due to them being more concerned about, or more worried by, problems such as global warming, extinction of species of flora and fauna, environmental pollution, and so on. This possibility warrants further research attention. Further evidence that the wellbeing of those who have taken up non-traditional R/S beliefs differs from those who do not endorse these beliefs comes from the findings related to delusional ideation. Delusional ideation in young adulthood In relation to research question (3), many differential relationships were observed between young adult religiosity, religious background, and delusional ideation in young adulthood. The findings that belief in God and church attendance in young adulthood, as well as religious background have no associations with disturbed ideation, suspiciousness, and paranormal (and grandiose) ideation, suggest that traditional R/S beliefs and active involvement with religious organisations have little to do with these particular domains of delusional ideation in young adulthood. The completely different pattern that emerged for non-traditional R/S beliefs raises specific concerns about the extent that beliefs which are associated with the New Spirituality might influence individuals’ thought processes in a negative way, or alternatively, the degree that those who embrace non-traditional R/S beliefs are attracted to these beliefs as a consequence of negative experiences, or a tendency towards both idiosyncratic and disturbed beliefs. As might be anticipated, those who believe in a spiritual or higher power other than God were found to be around four times more likely than non-believers to score in the upper decile for paranormal/grandiose ideation; since the items included in this domain are directly related to beliefs promoted within the New Spirituality. While the item that measures belief in voodoo, witchcraft and the occult is likely to capture those who subscribe to New Age beliefs, so too is the item measuring the belief that one is somehow “special”. New Age philosophy encompasses the idea that people can tap into universal energies to achieve any personal aim. No intermediaries are necessary. According to this view, each individual has direct access to the power of the universe. Bearing in mind also that the study by Stifler and colleagues (2005) found that members of contemplative/spiritual groups had elevated narcissism scores compared to normal subjects (hospital staff), the finding that a non-traditional approach to the divine is strongly linked to both paranormal and grandiose beliefs about oneself supports the 195 view that a mystical approach and narcissism are intertwined. It may be that the predominant focus on transformation of self among those with a “non-religious and spiritual” mindset leads to excessive “navel-gazing”; therefore, reinforcing a concern for self and the importance of self compared to others. Most interesting is that those who do not reject non-traditional R/S beliefs and who report that they are unsure if they believe in a spiritual or higher power other than God, are also at increased risk for paranormal/grandiose ideation, though the likelihood for this type of ideation is much lower than for those who actually endorse non-traditional R/S beliefs. This finding suggests the importance of differentiating those who reject a given belief from those who demonstrate uncertainty about whether they reject or endorse that belief. Approaches that group together non-believers and those who are unsure about a belief in a single category may mask differences in outcome for these two groups. This particular finding suggests that those who do not reject non-traditional R/S beliefs outright also have a tendency towards belief in the supernatural and that they are somehow “special”. The finding that those who endorse non-traditional R/S beliefs have low levels of religious ideation is not surprising, since the majority of those who endorse non-traditional R/S beliefs tend to be either unsure about believing in God or reject this belief outright. The above mentioned results share similarities to Saucier’s and Skrzypinska’s (2006) findings that those categorised as being aligned with “subjective spirituality” (a mystical approach to the sacred) are distinct from those who are traditionally religious, and supports their argument that single measures of religiousness/spirituality fail to capture these two distinct dispositions. Most noteworthy however is that those endorsing non-traditional R/S beliefs were found to be twice as likely to score in the upper decile for disturbed ideation, and around 1.5 times as likely to do likewise for the domain of suspiciousness, as those who reject non- traditional R/S beliefs. These particular findings suggest that this group, whose beliefs are clearly identifiable as being bound up with New Age philosophy (as demonstrated by their high paranormal/grandiosity scores) are more disturbed and suspicious or paranoid in their thinking than those who reject these beliefs. Even though cannabis use and use of other substances were each found to be related to belief in a spiritual and higher power, and to disturbed and to suspicious ideation, statistical adjustment for these influences had little effect on the observed associations. Pre-existing thought problems did not explain the association between disturbed and suspicious ideation either. It would therefore seem that non-traditional beliefs may encourage the development of disturbed and paranoid thoughts. It is also plausible 196 however, that the development of disturbed thoughts in between adolescence and adulthood are involved here. Young adults who endorse non-traditional R/S beliefs may be more concerned about, or worried by, thoughts that the world might end (one of the items that loaded under the disturbed ideation factor) because of global environmental problems and/or warfare. “Green” issues and the threat of nuclear extinction are topics of concern for those who embrace New Age spirituality (see Raschke, 1996). However, belief that the world might end represents just one of three items that individuals needed to endorse in order for them to score in the upper decile of disturbed ideation. Other disturbed ideation items that this group may have endorsed (“having no thoughts in your head at all”, thoughts feeling “alien in some way”, thoughts being “so vivid that you were worried other people would hear them”, thoughts being “echoed back to you”, and “feeling like a robot or zombie without a will or your own”) may reflect their belief in having experienced telepathic communication and/or a tendency towards dissociative experiences. Saucier and Skrypinska (2006) found that the mystically inclined have more dissociative experiences than those with a traditional religious orientation. It may also be that believers in a spiritual or higher power other than God have higher levels of suspicious ideation because they have had more negative experiences than those who reject these beliefs, such as victimisation, loss, grief, or betrayal by others, during the transition period from adolescence to adulthood. Their high scores for suspiciousness could potentially reflect these kinds of negative experiences. However, neither parental separation (or divorce or parental death), substance use, nor problem neighbourhoods were found to attenuate the effect observed for suspicious ideation for believers in a spiritual or higher power other than God. Thus, there seems little evidence to support the hypothesis that those with non-traditional R/S beliefs have higher levels of suspicious ideation because of substance use, or personal trauma. It would seem more likely that the high levels of suspicious ideation among those who endorse non-traditional R/S beliefs are linked to the tendency of those who subscribe to New Age thought to be suspicious of any authority other than their own (Possamai, 2000; Woodhead, 1993). The “anti-establishment” orientation of those who endorse a non- traditional conception of the divine, brought about by disenchantment with mainstream authority, may extend to other people and the world in general, leading to perceptions that these all pose various kinds of threat to personal security and wellbeing. This tendency towards suspiciousness may therefore carry over to this group’s social relationships in general, thereby explaining their higher levels of suspicious ideation. Religious background, and traditional R/S beliefs and church attendance in young 197 adulthood were all found to have no association with disturbed ideation, suspiciousness and paranormal (and grandiose) ideation (though infrequent church attenders were found to have lower rates of paranormal ideation). The lack of associations found between paranormal ideation and belief in God, weekly attendance at religious services, or religious background is especially interesting. This suggests that beliefs in the paranormal and in being “special or unusual” do not differ according to whether or not the young adults in this study believe in God, attend church services regularly, or have a religious or non-religious background. The higher odds ratios observed for religious ideation among those young adults who attend church regularly, and whose mothers were religiously affiliated (with the exception of Anglican mothers) is consistent with findings from previous research in which religious ideation has been linked to higher levels of religious activity (Getz, Fleck, & Strakowski, 2001). Remembering that scoring in the upper decile of religious ideation required that young adults endorsed both of the two items used to assess this form of ideation (that they felt “especially close to God” and that they had “been chosen by God in some way”), it is not surprising that those with a strong religious and/or spiritual faith would endorse both of these items. Religious ideation may well be an indicator of religious fervour rather than a measure of ‘delusional’ thinking, although it remains unclear whether religious fervour itself predisposes individuals to subsequent psychosis. Of particular interest however, is that offspring of mothers affiliated with one of the Pentecostal churches have the highest odds ratio for religious ideation, followed by offspring of those mothers who refused to answer the religious affiliation item. These findings provide further support for the view that exposure to Pentecostal religions during the developing years has long-term effects, as suggested by the strong tendency of this group to endorse a belief in God and to attend church in young adulthood. Moreover, the high odds ratio for religious ideation among this group identifies them as having very strong religious beliefs, with God being central to their self-identities. The high odds ratio observed for the “refused to answer” group suggests that mothers who refuse to answer a religious affiliation item are no less, and may even have stronger R/S beliefs than many of those who clearly identify their religious affiliation on survey forms. Offspring of Anglican mothers appear no different to those with no religious background in regard to religious ideation, which is consistent with this group’s comparatively low levels of belief in God and frequency of church attendance in young adulthood. The higher religious ideation scores for offspring of Catholic mothers compared to offspring of non-affiliated mothers, and the lack of difference in total PDI scores for offspring of Anglican mothers differs from Getz’s (2001) findings that Catholics had lower levels of religious ideation than Anglicans. 198 However, Getz’s study sample involved in-patients with psychosis and they were classified according to patients’ current religious affiliation and not the religion in which they were raised. Finally, total PDI scores were found to be highest for those whose mothers were affiliated with one of the Pentecostal churches during the young adult’s early life, followed by those who reported believing in a spiritual or higher power, and those who stated that they believed in God at the time of the 21-year follow-up. The fact that belief in God was not related to disturbed ideation, suspiciousness, or paranormal ideation, suggests that the high total PDI scores found for believers in God arose not just from their tendency to endorse each of the religious ideation items, but their endorsement of delusional items across other domains as well. The tendency of young adults with a Pentecostal background to have high scores for religious, disturbed, and paranormal ideation, accounts for this group’s high total PDI scores. The higher rate of upper decile total PDI scores found among those who believe in a spiritual or higher power is consistent with the Peters et al (1999) study which found that members of NRMs (Hare Krishnas and Druids) had higher total PDI scores than either Christians or those unaffiliated with any religion. These high PDI scores are to be expected for those with non-traditional R/S beliefs since they also had high scores across the domains of disturbed, suspicious, and paranormal ideation. Overall, the findings related to delusional ideation identify those who endorse non- traditional R/S beliefs as a group with elevated levels of delusional ideation in multiple domains. They not only tend towards New Age beliefs, but to disturbed and paranoid thoughts as well. The latter cannot be explained as an artefact of measurement due to delusional items directly tapping beliefs that are characteristic of a non-traditional approach to the divine. This warrants further investigation as a means to clarify whether New Age beliefs encourage disturbed and paranoid thinking, or if those who tend towards disturbed and paranoid thinking are attracted to New Age beliefs. Within this study’s sample, the strong associations between non-traditional R/S beliefs remained just as strong for disturbed, suspicious, and paranormal ideation (and total PDI scores) after young adults with prior thought disturbance were excluded from analyses. These results suggest that thought disturbance may have followed the uptake of non-traditional R/S beliefs, rather than having preceded these beliefs. This deserves due research attention given that religious conversion has been identified as a manifestation of “self-regression” (Beit-Hallahmi, 2001) and that some psychiatrists believe that irrational thoughts lead to a permanent and regressive change in personality (see Jones in Jones, Delespaul, & Van Os, 2003). 199 Antisocial behaviour in young adulthood The aim of research question (4) was to identify any differential relationships between measures of young adult religiosity and religious background, and externalising behaviour in young adulthood. In regard to traditional R/S beliefs, no connection was found between belief in God and antisocial behaviour for males. These results are consistent with findings from studies conducted many years ago by Argyle and Beit-Hallahmi (1975) and Lea (1982) showing no differences in the religious beliefs of delinquents and non-delinquents. However, weak negative associations were found between belief in God, as well as being unsure about believing in God, and externalising behaviour among females. It would seem therefore, that non-rejection of God among females has a modest connection to lower levels of antisocial behaviour. These weak negative associations either reached or failed to reach statistical significance depending on the other factors taken into account in analyses (non-traditional R/S beliefs and maternal weekly church attendance). The weak effect on antisocial behaviour observed for these groups may be due to these females being more likely to continue to embrace traditional religious norms about social behaviour than those who reject God outright. The lack of association between belief in God and antisocial behaviour among males, and the very modest negative association observed for females may well be a reflection of Australia’s socio-cultural history. Despite increasing secularisation and religious diversity within Australia, Christianity is the religious tradition on which Australian culture and Australian society are based, with Christian values being enshrined in Australian law. Thus, one would expect that Christian values and norms would continue to exert some ongoing influence on the Australian population as a whole, regardless of whether or not individuals report that they believe in God. The findings related to young adult church attendance are particularly interesting. The finding that males who attend church on a weekly basis are less likely to report high levels of antisocial behaviour than those who never attend church is consistent with the majority of previous studies reviewed by Gartner (1996) and Johnson et al. (2000). However, weekly church attendance was not found to have the same beneficial effect on female antisocial behaviour. The weakly significant negative association observed initially between weekly church attendance and female externalising behaviour failed to reach statistical significance once the influence of parents remaining together was taken into account. While the comparative lack of effect from weekly church attendance observed among females might appear somewhat curious, there are several possible explanations for this finding. 200 Firstly, it may be that the strength of social ties males have with other church members (promoted by regular contact) and the norms promoted within a church setting are important for deterring young men from behaving in an antisocial manner. However, the importance of religious membership for males may rest instead on the patriarchal nature of traditional religion, with this also explaining the lack of effect from weekly church attendance among females. Patriarchy is endemic in Christian religions. Discussion here focuses on Christianity since very few of the current study sample were from a non-Christian background. The feminist spirituality movement has drawn particular attention to the patriarchal nature of Christianity and has strongly criticised the Church’s use of masculine terms when describing God (Woodhead, 1993). Females who attend church regularly may feel at odds with church members they mix with in a church setting who maintain traditional religious beliefs, values, and norms that are patriarchal in orientation. Females may be offended by the historical and persisting influence of patriarchy within traditional religious organisations and thus be less likely than males to be influenced by the Church’s dictates in regard to social behaviour. This may help to explain why their rates of antisocial behaviour are little different to females who never attend church or those who attend church infrequently. Males who attend church regularly on the other hand, may be more prone to follow traditional religious teachings since these are rooted in patriarchy, which may give males a sense of security about their maleness and thus minimise the need for them to prove their power through aggression, delinquency or intrusive behaviour. This lends some support to Durkheim’s argument that religion helps to preserve the social order; in this case, the patriarchal social order. During Durkheim’s lifetime, traditional religion played a key role in preserving patriarchy, with this power gradually being undermined in wider society by the feminist movement and increased secularisation. The Anglican Church stands apart from many other Christian religions as having given some recognition to gender inequality within Church doctrine, as demonstrated by its endorsement of women entering the clergy. However, Christianity remains firmly rooted in patriarchy. The treatment of males and females within Christianity is necessarily influenced by the Bible and its symbolic representations of what it means to be male or female. The central male figure within Christianity is Jesus Christ, who is held to be the Son of God, while the most prominent female figures in the Christian tradition hold positions that range from having a divine connection (Mary, mother of Jesus Christ), to being saved from a life of prostitution (Mary Magdalene), to a temptress who is attributed most of the blame for the fall of all humankind (Eve tempting Adam to eat of the forbidden fruit in the Garden of Eden – “original sin”). Perhaps the beneficial association between weekly church attendance and 201 antisocial behaviour observed for males in this study is linked to the capacity of traditional religious organisations to provide a more gender-affirming environment for males than they provide females. Secondly, it is possible that Benda’s and Corwyn’s (2000) argument that church attendance is likely to be a poor measure of religious commitment among the young might be relevant to this study’s findings. Since church attendance among the young is likely to reflect family pressures placed upon young people to attend church, rather than a young person’s level of religious commitment, it may be that young adult females are more strongly influenced than males by family pressure to attend church. Thus, the gender differences observed on externalising behaviour from weekly church attendance in the current study may reflect to some degree, unwilling participation in religious services by females. Males who attend church regularly may be predominantly those who do so of their own volition. However, it is not clear that vulnerability to family pressure to attend church is more pronounced for females than males, and no significant difference was found between rates of male and female weekly church attendance within the sample. In addition, family pressure to attend church is likely to have less effect on individuals once they have reached young adulthood than when they were in early to mid-adolescence. Thus, there appears to be little grounds to suspect that unwilling participation in religious services is a plausible explanation for the gender differences observed. Thirdly, another plausible explanation for the gender differences observed for weekly church attendance is that males may tend to under-report their antisocial behaviour when completing survey forms. However, it is not clear why weekly church attending males in the study sample would be more subject to this kind of reporting bias than females who attend church at the same frequency. It is also noteworthy that church attendance on less than a weekly basis appears to have no beneficial effect on antisocial behaviour for either males or females. It may be that irregular church attendees lack a sense of identification with other church members and the congregation as a whole, as well as the beliefs and norms promoted by religious doctrine. Given that empirical data shows that people now move between churches and do not necessarily restrict themselves to the services provided by a given religious denomination, it is possible that switching between churches and the lack of commitment to any particular religious organisation or doctrine is more common among those who attend church irregularly. If this is the case, the norms and beliefs promoted by religious institutions may have little influence on the social behaviour of infrequent church attendees. However, the 202 notion that religiosity among younger generations represents a congregation of one (Arnett & Jensen, 2002) may be most relevant here, with those who attend religious services on an infrequent basis being no more constrained by religious doctrine than those who never attend church. In relation to religious background, only weekly maternal church attendance was found to be weakly and negatively associated with antisocial behaviour, and this was solely the case for males. However, the statistical significance of this association disappeared after maternal age and parents remaining together were taken into account. Mothers who attended church on a weekly basis during their offspring’s childhood years were more likely to be over twenty years of age at the time of delivery and to have never divorced or separated over the course of their children’s lives. Previous studies using cross-sectional data have shown a beneficial effect from regular maternal church attendance on adolescent aggression (for example McCullough & Larson, 1999) but few studies have the capacity to determine whether regular maternal church attendance has a long-term effect on offspring behaviour into adulthood and the extent that family characteristics confound this relationship. In contrast to the findings for belief in God and church attendance, non-traditional R/S beliefs were found to predict higher levels of antisocial behaviour, regardless of gender. The strong positive associations found between belief in a spiritual or higher power other than God, and externalising behaviour for both males and females suggest that the move away from traditional religion to alternative forms of religiosity are having some negative influence on young adults’ social behaviour. These findings may however, reflect the embracing of particular R/S beliefs because they allow individuals the freedom to behave in ways that are generally discouraged by traditional religions. However, the causal link between non- traditional R/S beliefs and antisocial behaviour is suggested by the lack of change in effect in the association between non-traditional R/S beliefs and antisocial behaviour, once prior externalising behaviour was taken into account. Thus, higher levels of antisocial behaviour among those who believe in a spiritual or higher power other than God do not appear to be attributable to antisocial personality traits. These results suggest that the worldview of the New Spirituality (as indicated by belief in a spiritual or higher power) does not serve to reinforce social norms and values and further, this particular worldview may actually undermine social norms and values for males and females alike. These findings support observations of the New Spirituality as being anti-establishment in orientation and raise concerns that this orientation extends to the way individuals interact with others in their social environments on a day-to-day basis. 203 Belief in God is endorsed by Christians and non-Christians, as well as those who have no religious affiliation. Likewise, belief in a spiritual or higher power is not dependent upon religious affiliation, but captures all those who have embraced beliefs that deviate from traditional religious thought, regardless of the extent of their past or ongoing involvement with religious institutions. The findings on antisocial behaviour in this study lend strong support to Campbell’s (2001) argument that the New Age theodicy is a-social and individualistic in nature, since antisocial behaviours are indicative of a tendency towards self- gratification, a lack of consideration and respect for others’ interests, as well as disregard for the consequences of one’s actions on others. Intrusiveness and aggressive and delinquent acts imply a lack of moral duty and social obligation to others. The strong associations observed between these behaviours and non-traditional R/S beliefs raise serious concerns that this new form of religiosity might directly undermine prosocial norms and values at a community level. Potential confounders: insight into the characteristics of those who endorse non-traditional religious/spiritual beliefs Even though numerous factors were identified as potential confounders in this study, their effects on the observed associations between belief in a spiritual or higher power other than God and young adult mental health and social behaviour were trivial. Nevertheless, attention to the findings from the preliminary analyses undertaken to identify possible confounders provide some insight into the individual and social characteristics of those whose beliefs are aligned with the New Spirituality. Socioeconomic factors such as maternal age and education, and family income in adolescence, as well cultural factors like race, appear to have no association with the uptake of non-traditional beliefs in young adulthood, regardless of gender. By contrast, belief in a spiritual or higher power was found to be associated with high alcohol and cannabis use, other substance use, and parental divorce, separation or death. Living in problem neighbourhood was also found to be associated with endorsement of non- traditional R/S beliefs. The link between these factors and changes that are characteristic of contemporary society such as the breakdown of the family unit, increased urbanisation, high alcohol consumption and use of other substances among the young is obvious. Thus, it would seem that the adoption of non-traditional R/S beliefs is connected to the conditions of contemporary life. While substance use was not observed to confound any of the associations between belief in a spiritual or higher power other than God, and anxiety/depression or externalising behaviour, it is noteworthy that health-risk behaviours are linked to non- traditional R/S beliefs. It would seem unlikely that non-traditional R/S beliefs directly encourage alcohol and substance use. However, the fact that the philosophy of the New 204 Spirituality encourages individual decision making about beliefs and behaviour and has no doctrine that proscribes alcohol consumption, cannabis or other substance use, may well make those who adopt this philosophy more likely to consume higher levels of alcohol and to experiment with drugs and other substances. Alternatively, it may be that young adults who are already consuming large amounts of alcohol, who are regular cannabis users, or who have experimented with other substances, and who also have some religious yearning are easily attracted to a R/S belief system that does not prohibit such behaviours. A proportion of believers in a spiritual or higher power other than God who have used cannabis or other illicit substances, may also have adopted this belief following their experiences of altered states of consciousness while under the influence of these substances. These altered states may be perceived by them as being “spiritual experiences”, and thus be conceived as evidence of the existence of a higher or spiritual power. Belief in God among this study’s sample was found to be negatively associated with high alcohol and cannabis use, and church attendance negatively associated with high alcohol and cannabis use, and use of other illicit substances. While Luckmann (2003) claims that contemporary forms of religiosity are hedonistic in orientation in general, it is worth noting that this study’s findings suggest that hedonistic activity among young adults might be more attributable to those who hold non-traditional R/S beliefs, than it is to those who maintain traditional R/S beliefs. Summary Overall, the findings from this study indicate that belief in a spiritual or higher power other than God is positively associated with anxiety/depression, high levels of delusional ideation, and antisocial behaviour. Although the associations observed between this belief and anxiety/depression were fairly modest for both females and males, and the association for males was found to be explained by pre-existing anxiety/depression, the findings related to delusional ideation and antisocial behaviour suggest that the shift away from traditional religious thought towards non-religious forms of spirituality has the potential to compromise mental health and undermine prosocial norms. Alternatively, it may be that non-traditional R/S beliefs are a marker for those who are disenchanted with life in the modern world, who question the legitimacy of the existing social order, and whose mental health and social relationships are being compromised as a result. Either way, the findings from this study suggest that new forms of religiosity demand further research attention as a means to understand the extent that religious change is linked to population mental health and social behaviour among younger generations. 205 While traditional religiosity appears to have little to do with anxiety/depression, whether assessed by belief in God, church attendance, or religious background, weekly church attendance appears to play some role in deterring antisocial behaviour among young Australian adults, particularly males. It needs to be remembered however, that only eight per cent of young adults in this study were found to attend church on a regular basis, similar to the national Australian average for all adult age groups (8.8%). Thus, the benefit that weekly church attendance might provide in deterring antisocial behaviour is only applicable to a small proportion of young adult males. Alternative conceptions of the divine were found to be endorsed by nearly one quarter of the young adults in this study. Thus it would seem that the open market of religious worldviews that Luckmann (2003) sees as characterising contemporary religiosity is leading to younger generations developing new forms of religion that ultimately have little or no connection to the religion of their ancestors (Luckmann, 1967). The findings from this study suggest that new forms of religion, which represent a departure from traditional religious thought, may lead to moral duty and social responsibility being replaced by a predominant focus on self-fulfilment and self-gratification – the “new norm for a New Age”. The limitations of this study are discussed below. The implications of this study’s findings and possible directions for future research are outlined in the next chapter, Chapter Eight. Limitations of the current study In determining the religious background of the young adult sample, this study has relied upon maternal report of the mother’s belief in God, maternal religious affiliation at entry to the study, as well as maternal church attendance when the child was five years of age because no direct measures of the study child’s attendance at church or R/S beliefs were included in any wave of data collection until the 21-year follow-up. This has prevented any examination of the study child’s direct involvement in church or religious activities during childhood or adolescence and their connection to religiosity or to mental health and social behaviour in young adulthood. This caveat needs to be kept in mind when interpreting the study’s findings. Connections found between maternal belief in God and religious affiliation rest on information gathered during the prenatal period, and maternal church attendance in childhood. The study mothers may have changed their religious affiliation at any stage subsequent to the commencement of the study, and therefore, this study is unable to determine either the extent of changes in maternal religious affiliation over time or any 206 influence this may have had on offspring religiosity or their mental health and social behaviour in young adulthood. Nevertheless, the fact that strong associations were found between religious background at an early stage of the young adult’s life, and their levels of religious ideation two decades later, suggests that exposure to R/S beliefs in early childhood may give children a sense of relationship with God that stays with them over the long-term. This study also lacked information about paternal religious affiliation, beliefs and activities and it may be that in some households, paternal rather than maternal religiosity would be a better predictor of offspring mental health and behaviour. However, since mothers are more likely than fathers to have taken the main responsibility for childrearing during the period of the 1980s, and mothers may have also changed their religious affiliation and patterns of church attendance to coincide with that of their partners, it is plausible that for the majority of the study sample, maternal religiosity would be a better predictor of offspring outcomes than paternal religiosity. It remains however, that this study does not have the capacity to detect differences in the outcomes of interest that might be connected to paternal religiosity. Despite these limitations, the effects observed from religious background in this study suggest the importance of considering this dimension when investigating the religion-mental health relationship. The young adults in this study were also not asked about religious affiliation at the time of the 21-year follow-up, thus preventing any investigation into the correspondence, or lack of correspondence, in religious affiliation between mother and child, or any connections between the outcomes of interest and the study children’s religious affiliation in young adulthood. However, the main focus of this thesis is comparison of mental health outcomes according to contrasting conceptions of the divine, irrespective of affiliation or non-affiliation with a given religion. It has also been argued in this thesis that identification and non-identification with a particular religious group or organisation fails to differentiate traditional from non-traditional religiosity in a contemporary setting. Thus, the lack of access to information about young adult religious affiliation does not undermine the argument presented in this thesis. The reliance on belief in a spiritual or higher power other than God as a measure of non-traditional R/S beliefs gives no indication as to whether this belief represents alignment with the worldviews promoted by the Deep Ecology movement, the New Age/Human Potential movements, feminist spirituality, or other varieties of spirituality that distance themselves from mainstream religion. However again, one can argue that this non-traditional approach to the divine is a mode of thought that is characteristic of all these different varieties of spirituality and thus the lack of information about whether respondents conceive a spiritual or higher 207 power as being related more to forces of nature, to universal forces, or to an abstract notion like love, peace, or spirit, does not compromise the findings from this study. The attrition rate between birth and young adulthood among the young adult sample (47.7%) is substantial. The findings from this study would be biased if the associations that have been assessed were non-existent or in the opposite direction for non-participants, which is unlikely. The levels of church attendance and the prevalence of R/S beliefs observed among the study sample are similar to those found for the Australian population (ABS, 2001a; Bellamy & Castle, 2004). Thus, there seems to be little reason to suspect that the study sample over-represents or under-represents churchgoers or those who maintain R/S beliefs. Sociodemographic factors that characterised those lost to follow-up have been considered in this study, with them being found to have little or no effect on observed associations between non-traditional R/S beliefs and anxiety/depression, delusional ideation, and externalising behaviour. These factors were also found to have little effect on associations between young adult belief in God or church attendance, and delusional ideation and externalising behaviour. Therefore, it appears that attrition has not biased estimates related to young adult religiosity and the mental health and behavioural outcomes examined, in any substantial way. Differential attrition according to maternal belief in God, church attendance and religious affiliation may have biased estimates derived from maternal religiosity to some degree, given that mothers who didn’t believe in God, who never attended church, and who had no religious affiliation had higher attrition rates. However, maternal religiosity was found to have no associations with young adult anxiety/depression or externalising behaviour in young adulthood. Thus, attrition bias related to measures of maternal religiosity is only of concern for the findings related to delusional ideation outcomes and connections between maternal religiosity and young adult religiosity. Since effects related to these outcomes are based on mothers with no belief in God, who never attended church, and who had no religious affiliation as reference groups, the higher attrition rates observed for offspring of mothers with these characteristics suggest that the estimates related to maternal religiosity are likely to be underestimates rather than overestimates. The measures of young adult anxiety/depression and antisocial behaviour rely on young adult self-report and thus cannot be considered the same as a diagnosis by a clinician. However, Achenbach’s (1997) YASR instrument has been shown to have high reliability and adequate validity, and clinician-based diagnoses also rely heavily on patient self-report. Due to the attrition rate, determinations of caseness in this study were purposefully based on Achenbach’s designated cut-offs for borderline-clinical problems for normative samples rather 208 than the distribution of scores among the MUSP sample, to ensure that loss to follow-up has not led to selection bias among those individuals categorised as “cases”. It would also seem unlikely that estimates of anxiety/depression, delusional ideation or externalising behaviour are subject to self-report bias, unless the reporting of symptoms by young adults in this study was influenced by the holding of particular R/S beliefs, attendance at church, or gender. If young adults who endorse non-traditional R/S beliefs are more prone to report symptoms of anxiety/depression than those who endorse traditional R/S beliefs or have no R/S beliefs, this would suggest a tendency among this group to exaggerate symptoms of depression and anxiety. Those who endorse non-traditional R/S beliefs may be more preoccupied with their feeling states than others. If this were the case, the findings would still suggest that non- traditional R/S beliefs might undermine an individual’s sense of his or her emotional wellbeing. It is also unclear whether this group might over-report symptoms of intrusiveness, aggression and delinquency. However, there seems to be no plausible reason for suspecting that those who hold non-traditional R/S beliefs perceive their social behaviours differently to those who reject these beliefs. Weekly church attenders on the other hand, may tend to under-report symptoms of antisocial behaviour, since antisocial acts represent a failure to comply with religious teachings. If this form of bias has affected the findings in the current study, one would expect that similar effects would have been observed from weekly church attendance for males and females alike, but gender differences were found. Nevertheless, it is possible that males who attend church regularly are more prone to under-report symptoms of externalising behaviour than their female counterparts. One significant limitation of this study is that the findings related to religiosity and mental health outcomes in young adulthood rest on cross-sectional data and thus caution is needed when inferring causality. However, the capacity of this study to draw on longitudinal data from the adolescent period (that assess the same types of outcomes in young adulthood) allows some inferences to be made about the extent that the poorer outcomes of those who hold non-traditional R/S beliefs are due to personality traits. Finally, this study has relied on secondary data analysis in answering the research questions formulated for the purposes of this study. Qualitative approaches and methods such as participant observation, ethnography, focus groups, content analysis, and interviews hold great potential for elucidating the mechanisms that may explain the associations observed in this study. Possible directions for future research involving these methods are outlined towards the end of the next and final chapter, Chapter Eight. 209 Chapter Eight: Conclusion This thesis has drawn attention to the lack of adequate theories that currently inform investigations into connections between religiousness, spirituality, mental health and social behaviour. As noted by Hill and colleagues (2000) the upsurge in interest in spirituality appears to be evidence-driven, and not theory-driven. This evidence rests on operational definitions of religion, religiousness, and spirituality that reflect inconsistent conceptualisations of these terms. The lack of consensus concerning these terms mean and how they might be measured serves to support the argument that religion is not “an intelligible entity” and is therefore not a valid object of inquiry within a scientific paradigm (Smith, 1991:12). It also lends support to the view that the concept religion is “solely the creation of the scholar’s study” with “no independent existence apart from the academy” (Smith, 1982:xi). The lack of agreement on what religion and spirituality are, or how they might be distinguished from one another, undermines the legitimacy of religion (or spirituality) being regarded as a valid scientific concept. The conceptual and methodological issues that surround the study of religion and spirituality have to be addressed if these types of arguments are to be convincingly rejected. It needs to be borne in mind that these same sorts of arguments could be mounted against the study of social phenomena more generally. If the study of religion were to be abandoned on the basis of the criticisms identified above, it would follow that the study of other social factors that are complex and multidimensional in nature should likewise be abandoned. Unlike the physical and natural sciences, the social sciences frequently face many problems in measuring their objects of enquiry. Measuring an individual’s level of religious commitment or the importance individuals place on religion and/or spirituality as a means to negotiate daily living is especially difficult, given the disparate meanings ascribed to these terms within contemporary settings. The tendency for many researchers in the area of religion and spirituality who use quantitative methods, to employ statistical methods like correlation or linear regression analyses, assumes that factors like belief or frequency of church attendance involve interval measurements when this is not the case. These kinds of statistical methods treat responses to a question like “Do you believe in God” that range from “no”, “don’t know”, to “yes” in a manner that conceives them as having equal levels of difference from one another. The “don’t know” category in particular, may involve those who rarely give God a passing thought, as well as those who reflect often on religious and spiritual matters such as the existence and nature of God and the meaning of life. Belief in the existence of some sort of spirit or force, as a third level value of belief in God (with “not sure” and “no belief” 210 representing the second and first levels of this measure) for analytical purposes (see Francis & Kaldor, 2002 for example) fails to consider the very different worldviews implied by different approaches to the divine. This kind of approach thus holds little promise for examining differences in outcome that might be attributable to differing worldviews. The legitimacy of assuming that linear relationships exist between measures of R/S beliefs, or self-identification with religiousness/spirituality, and health outcomes is questionable. Further development of measures is needed to enable simple measures to be devised which are able to differentiate those who give R/S matters little attention from those who give R/S matters considered thought but who are loathe to reject or endorse a given belief and simply choose the “don’t know” or “unsure” options by default. Evidence identifying null relationships between religion/spirituality and mental health are too easily taken to indicate that religiosity does not “count”. Such findings may reflect to a small or a large extent, problems of measurement, the analytical methods used, as well as the limitations imposed by the scientific method more generally. Observations of “no effects” from measures of religiosity do not necessarily equate to religiosity being unimportant as an influence over particular health outcomes, but rather that the phenomena being studied create many more difficulties for researchers than are faced by those who restrict their attention to tangible and more concrete phenomena. Like the work by Saucer and Skrzypinska (2006), the findings from this thesis indicate that a traditional religious orientation represents a form of religiosity that is distinct from that which is non-traditional in orientation, by virtue of the different patterns of thinking that are associated with each of these orientations. These two distinct belief systems thus require consideration within research enterprises investigating connections between religiousness, spirituality, and health. Even though efforts have been made to devise multiple-item scales that can capture different R/S orientations, and these may provide insight into differential connections between various religions, different varieties of spirituality, and various aspects of health status in the future, these may be too cumbersome for inclusion in large-scale population studies. Large research enterprises may be forced to rely on a limited number of items that have the capacity to differentiate between traditional and non-traditional approaches to religion and spirituality. It may therefore be necessary for researchers to make decisions about analytical methods that are appropriate to the objects of their enquiries based on the nature of these phenomena, the measures available to them, and how they might best be examined to further understanding of the various ways different aspects of religion and spirituality influence health and vice versa. While the inclusion of spirituality as a new object of enquiry within the study of religion has served to exacerbate the conceptual, theoretical and 211 methodological issues that are common to the study of religion, it also provides opportunities for theory building and revision, as well as re-thinking the ways in which religion is conceived and studied. Unless these opportunities are embraced, the study of religion will no doubt remain of peripheral interest to the wider scientific community, do little to advance the pool of knowledge beyond that which has already accumulated over the past 100 years or so, and certainly not extend our understanding of the extent that religion and spirituality contribute to patterns of mental health and social behaviour in the contemporary world. Georg Simmel’s (1997[1898-1918]) approach to religion seems to hold promise as a platform from which theories of religion can be revised. Simmel’s notion that being religious is more about an individual’s “attitude of soul” than it is about collective religious representations, raises the possibility that religiousness has little to do with whether an individual self-describes as being religious, non-religious, spiritual, or agnostic. Simmel’s argument that it is those without an attitude of soul who most need religion, since it may be the only means by which they develop a sense of moral duty, gives cause for re-assessing the way religiousness is conceived. Simmel’s conception of religiousness questions the notion that those who attend religious services, join spiritual groups or adopt particular R/S practices are more ‘religious’ than those without membership to a particular group, or those who don’t engage in particular rituals or practices. Perhaps a sense of moral duty to others, to society and the world at large, as well as actions that reflect this position, should figure more strongly as an object of enquiry as the constitutive elements of “being religious”; rather than continuing to use concepts and measures of religion that largely fail to capture qualities that reflect an “attitude of soul”. Single measures of self-perceptions of being “religious/spiritual”, and self-perceptions of the “importance of religiousness/spirituality” would seem to hold little promise for furthering our understanding of spirituality and religiousness and their beneficial and harmful qualities. There is little way of knowing what these terms mean to those who are studied, or the types of beliefs, attitudes, and/or practices that might be represented by people’s self- perceptions of their level of religiousness and/or spirituality. Furthermore, self-perceptions of spirituality/religiousness serve to ignore social contexts altogether, by conceiving spirituality and religiousness as a singular personal quality. Zinnbauer and colleagues (1999:903) argue that the regard of spirituality “as a solely personal phenomenon” overlooks “the cultural context in which this construct has emerged, and the fact that spirituality is not experienced or expressed in a social vacuum”. This parallels Durkheim’s argument that to regard mental illness and suicide as individual phenomena is to neglect the role of the social in these 212 outcomes. Zinnbauer et al. (1999:903) argue further that it is “no coincidence that the popularity of spirituality has grown in a culture that values individualism and rejects conventional authority”. Thus, research approaches to the study of spirituality that fail to consider the cultural, economic, and political contexts in which this term has arisen, and instead see spirituality as merely a personal quality, are likely to provide little insight into the spirituality-mental health relationship. The positive and negative sides of religion have attracted substantial theoretical interest and a considerable amount of empirical attention. To date however, little theoretical or empirical attention has been directed towards the potential harmful qualities of spirituality. Zinnbauer et al. (1999:904) argued years ago that “the notion of “good” spirituality may lead scholars and those in the greater population to neglect the potentially destructive side of spiritual life”. Any notion that spirituality is a superior form of religiosity to traditional religiousness, because it allows individuals freedom of choice and freedom of expression, rests on the assumption that the decisions and actions of those who favour a spiritual worldview have some advantages over those whose decisions and actions are steered and/or constrained by traditional religious norms and values. The legitimacy of this assumption needs to be questioned, given that only a handful of studies have examined spirituality as a phenomenon that is distinct from religion, and their respective findings give no indication that “spirituality” has more positive consequences for either the individual or society. The broader social processes that have led to the emergence of a non-religious variety of spirituality by substantial proportions of populations throughout the Western world warrant specific attention. The current study’s findings are discussed below giving consideration to the socio-cultural context in which contemporary R/S beliefs and practices have arisen, as well as the possible directions future research enterprises might take to further our understanding of why a non-traditional R/S worldview might influence mental health and social behaviour in negative ways. The study findings and their implications for future research The findings from this study provide empirical evidence that belief in a spiritual or higher power other than God is related to young adult anxiety/depression, and that this belief predicts various forms of delusional ideation and antisocial behaviour in early adulthood, regardless of gender. Even though demographic and socioeconomic factors, health-risk behaviours, family structure, and the quality of neighbourhoods in which young adults live were taken into account in this study, they were found to have no moderating effect on the negative outcomes observed for young adults who conceive the divine to be a spiritual or higher power rather than God. It is noteworthy however, that the embracing of a non- 213 traditional approach to the divine appears to be associated with factors that reflect conditions that are perceived as characteristic of contemporary life such as neighbourhood crime and delinquency, changes in family structure, and high use of alcohol, cannabis, and other substances. Yet, problem neighbourhoods, family breakdown, and health-risk behaviours were not found to explain the links observed between belief in a spiritual or higher power and anxiety/depression, delusional ideation, and antisocial behaviour in young adulthood. The findings do not support the notion that associations between non-traditional R/S beliefs and poor mental health and aberrant social behaviour rest on the fact that those who have a chronic mental illness or an antisocial personality are prone to adopt these beliefs. While a prior history of anxiety/depression was found to contribute to anxiety/depression in young adulthood for males who endorse belief in a spiritual or higher power, this was not the case for females. Prior history of thought problems did not explain the association between this particular conception of the divine and various forms of delusional ideation in young adulthood, and antisocial behaviour in adolescence did not appear to be involved in the association between belief in a spiritual or higher power and antisocial behaviour in young adulthood. Even though females were found in this study (consistent with previous studies) to endorse non-traditional R/S beliefs more than males, adjustment for gender made no difference to the relationships observed between a non-traditional conception of the divine and various forms of delusional ideation. The pattern that emerged too, for belief in a spiritual or higher power and antisocial behaviour among females and males was almost identical. Together these findings identify the shift away from traditional religious forms of spirituality to a non-religious variety of spirituality (the New Spirituality) as a trend that warrants further empirical attention for its possible negative implications for young adult mental health and social behaviour at both an individual and population level. The findings from this study also indicate that belief in God and church attendance have no association with anxiety/depression, or to disturbed ideation or suspiciousness in young adulthood. Females who are unsure about God, appear to be slightly less likely to report antisocial behaviour than those who reject this belief, but females who believe in God appear to be no better off than those who reject God, once belief in a spiritual power is taken into account. This appears to be due to the tendency of a proportion of young adults to maintain traditional R/S beliefs and to embrace non-traditional R/S beliefs simultaneously. Males on the other hand appear to gain no benefit in terms of their social behaviour, from believing in God. Church attendance also appears to have little influence in deterring antisocial behaviour among young adults, except for males who attend church services on a weekly 214 basis. However, given that such a small proportion of young Australians attend church on a weekly basis, any benefits derived from lower rates of antisocial behaviour among male church attenders is likely to have a minimal effect at a population level. The gender differences observed in this study in relation to weekly church attendance and antisocial behaviour, suggest that further attention needs to be given to the ways in which gender affects young people’s experiences within traditional religious organisations, and the extent that these experiences give rise to differences in the attitudes and behaviours of females and males. It needs to be borne in mind that this conclusion is based on findings for a sample that is predominantly Christian in background. Only 1.7 per cent of the young adults who reported attending church services on a weekly basis had a non-Christian background. Overall, the findings related to traditional R/S beliefs and participation in religious services indicate that these particular aspects of religiosity might be having little influence, positive or negative, on the mental and emotional wellbeing and social behaviour of younger generations. This study’s findings suggest the possibility of a causal link between non-traditional R/S beliefs and anxiety/depression, delusional ideation, and antisocial behaviour. Given the current paucity of empirical evidence related to non-religious forms of spirituality, and mental health and social behaviour, it would seem that future mental health research in the area of religion and spirituality needs to be directed towards the beliefs and practices encompassed by the New Spirituality, within the context of its nonconformist and radical origins. Raschke (1996:207) summarises the New Age movement as follows: The New Age movement – a lush jungle of exotic spirituality, lifestyle preferences, metaphysical preoccupations, and voguish superstitions – is in many respects a codifying of what in the late 1960s and up through most of the 1970s was called ‘alternative’ culture. He also attributes the mainstreaming of New Age thinking to the “coming to power and prominence of the baby boomers”, and to “an instinctive rejection by younger masses of the populace of the political and social preoccupations that had prevailed since the 1940s” (Raschke, 1996:215-216). The links that have been identified by numerous authors between the New Spirituality and the feminist movement, the baby boom generation, the hippie counter-culture of the 1960s, environmentalist groups, Eastern and native religious beliefs and practices, and holistic medicine, suggest that the anti-establishment orientation of the New Spirituality is perhaps its most important feature from a health perspective. Raschke (1996:207,220) describes New Age spirituality as a “kaleidoscope of fads, fantasies, and follies”, a “large-scale form of psychodrama that is unintelligible to those both younger and older”, a “dramatic spectacle of the social unconscious”, a “massive working out of issues”, 215 and argues that the New Age is “America’s burden for the foreseeable future”. If Raschke is correct in his assessment, the New Age is not a burden carried by the United States alone – it is a load shared by other nations. The New Age movement’s contemptuous regard of Western culture in general is evidenced by its willingness to embrace almost any belief or practice that departs from traditional Christian culture, its rejection of patriarchy, its experimentation with alternative health practices, and its apparent disregard for anything that is claimed to represent scientific ‘fact’. Thus, greater theoretical and empirical attention needs to be focussed on non- religious spirituality, not merely as a personal quality, but as an entity that is distinct from traditional religion by virtue of it encompassing multiple beliefs and practices that have arisen out of a rejection of patriarchy, religious authority and dogma, and mainstream values and beliefs. Otherwise, researchers, clinicians and educators alike may fail to grasp the salience of contemporary religiosity to the health and wellbeing of individuals and populations, as well as the nature of the mechanisms that give rise to better or worse outcomes for the religiously and spiritually inclined. The panoply of beliefs and practices that are characteristic of the New Age movement and its political and counter-cultural origins provide countless opportunities for theory building and research. Theorists and future research enterprises might focus on the content of New Age beliefs and practices for their capacity to encourage irrational thinking and the rejection of social norms. The idea that individuals should take authority over moral decision making and behaviour, a view promoted by the New Spirituality, suggests that individuals who are aligned with the New Spirituality might perceive themselves as being free to think and act as they please. The findings from this study tend to support this hypothesis. Young adults who reported believing in a spiritual or higher power other than God were found to have significantly higher rates of paranormal/grandiose ideation and externalising behaviour – suggestive that these individuals believe they have access to, or experience of, supernatural powers, tend towards delusions of grandeur, and behave in ways that give expression to these views. Given the anti-establishment nature of the New Age movement, it may be that the non-traditional and oft times bizarre nature of these beliefs and practices may be a core element that attracts people to a New Spirituality approach – because these beliefs and practices are “deviant” by traditional religious and mainstream standards. New Age settings may act as a means for these beliefs and practices to be “legitimised” because they are conceived by those within these settings to represent free expression of creativity and individuality – signifiers of individual freedom from traditional norms and constraints. New Age networks may thus reinforce unconventional ideas, practices, and behaviour, and even escalate their transmission 216 and reproduction. Popular culture may work in tandem with these networks. Cinema and television screens have provided a steady stream of tales and images over the past few decades to audiences all over the world, which portray human life as being bound up with supernatural and paranormal forces, and alien life forms. Prominent movie stars, Tom Cruise and John Travolta, have publicly identified themselves as dedicated Scientologists. Shirley Maclaine achieved “New Age guru” status during the 1980s, following the publishing her book, Out on a Limb (Maclaine, 1983), and the televising of her movie under the same title. J.Z. Knight (an American business woman who claims to be a “channel” for a 35,000 year-old “spiritual warrior” known as “Ramtha”) holds celebrity status as a spirit-channeller and prophetess in the United States (see Raschke, 1996). Knight is just one in a long parade of New Age/Human Potential entrepreneurs from the United States who have successfully “sold their wares” to Australians in recent decades. The Human Potential component of New Age philosophy may lead to unrealistic expectations about what individuals can achieve and change in their lives, thus leading to feelings of anxiety and depression when these expectations fail to be realised. Even though brainwashing theories appear to have lost favour within the scientific community, the means and methods used by New Age/Human Potential entrepreneurs in their seminars and workshops warrant closer examination as a means by which audiences are steered towards irrational thinking and behaviour. Techniques such as creative visualisation, affirmations, guided meditations, and overt promotion of the idea that participants need to be “re- programmed” towards positive thinking, success, and happiness, may make audiences vulnerable to the many suggestions made by these entrepreneurs, thereby shaping their worldviews, attitudes, and behaviours. There is no suggestion here that audiences are unwilling participants in this “re-programming” process. However, the means and methods employed by New Age/Human Potential entrepreneurs need to be scrutinised for their capacity to persuade people that they need to alter their thinking processes, and the extent of influence these alterations might have on the lives of those who readily embrace these “life-changing” ideas and practices. New Age/Human Potential entrepreneurs commonly target parents, families, educators, science, religion, as well as members of wider society, as being the original “programmers” of negative thoughts and beliefs that lead to individuals limiting their own creative potential, success, and wellbeing. “Re-progamming” represents a simple solution to complex problems. The rhetoric of New Age/Human Potential entrepreneurs is framed in terms of the need for “taking personal responsibility for one’s life”. Yet, underlying this rhetoric is an attribution of blame for individual problems to society and its members in the 217 first instance, with this blame subtly being shifted to individuals themselves, once they have become privy to the “truth” about the nature of “blockages” that serve to undermine their chances for personal success and wellbeing. The adoption of this particular worldview may help to foster suspiciousness, by reinforcing the perception that others who do not embrace these ideas and techniques are inferiors, or adversaries - thus having the potential to undermine social relationships. While the taking of personal responsibility is promoted as the way individuals can become more self-empowered and transform themselves and their lives, it also serves to make them responsible for any future experience of discontent or unhappiness. These mixed messages that emphasise both personal responsibility and a toxic social environment may serve to confuse individuals, even if these same individuals perceive themselves to be self-empowered and positive about their futures. Numerous research questions and hypotheses might be devised in order to further our understanding of the New Spirituality and its possible negative influence on health for younger (and older) generations. A first step would be to find out about the ways in which young adults become attracted to non-traditional R/S beliefs. Are young people influenced more by popular culture or by the beliefs and practices of partners, friends, family, fellow students, teachers, employers, work colleagues, or acquaintances, or a combination of these? This study did not have the capacity to determine whether there is any connection between parental endorsement of non-traditional R/S beliefs and endorsement of these same beliefs in offspring. It is currently unknown if there is an intergenerational link in the uptake of non- traditional R/S beliefs. It may be that parents with the greatest tendency towards religious nonconformity and political radicalism have transmitted similar beliefs and values to their children. Studies are needed which can determine whether young people are members of the audience and client cults identified by Bainbridge and Stark (Bainbridge, 2004b; Bainbridge & Stark, 1980). Are young people similar or different to their older counterparts in the kinds of New Age activities in which they engage? To what extent do they purchase self-help books and books about spiritual wisdom/transformation, as well as other types of New Age materials and products? Do they have a tendency to visit various types of New Age therapists, Tarot Card readers, aura readers, spirit-channellers, and crystal and/or psychic or spiritual healers more than older generations? Do they participate in Human Potential workshops and seminars, attend meditation classes, yoga classes, spiritual retreats, and join spiritual groups or organisations? Answers to these questions may help to provide some insight into the interplay between New Age ideology and social interactions, as well as the mechanisms that might give rise to anxiety and depression, deluded thoughts, and antisocial behaviours among young 218 adults who endorse non-traditional R/S beliefs. Secondly, do young people experiment with multiple practices that are associated with ancient, native or Eastern religions, and which fall under the categories of alternative medicine and/or Human Potential, spiritualism, and witchcraft, and does their choice of activity change over time? If so, does this eclectic approach serve to confuse young people in terms of what to believe, how they think, and the way they should behave? Does it also lead to feelings of insecurity? Thirdly, how do young adults’ New Age beliefs and practices influence the way they perceive and experience their relationships with others? Do they believe that they are on a solitary journey and thus tend to feel isolated from others? Do they have a tendency to be combative in their interactions with others, believing that others are unenlightened, non- spiritual, and/or too traditional and mainstream in the way they think and behave, and in need of “being changed”, with these perceptions serving to undermine the harmony and quality of their social relationships? Do they have a general mistrust of others? Are they preoccupied with worries about the environment and the future of the world and thus have a tendency to become anxious and depressed? Do they perceive society in a negative light, and thus rebel against social norms? Fourthly, we need to know whether there are individual and structural factors that predict young people’s attraction to New Age thinking. Have young people’s attraction to New Age beliefs and/or practices been triggered by traumatic life events or stressful circumstances, and are these of a personal nature or related to broader social processes and conditions? Fifthly, we need to know the extent to which New Age philosophy affects the way young people perceive themselves and others. Are those who adopt a do-it-yourself approach to self-transformation in danger of developing distorted ways of thinking? Does an emphasis on personal transformation and self-actualisation encourage excessive “navel-gazing”, a preoccupation with one’s own feeling states, a sense of superiority, elitist attitudes, and narcissism? Does an emphasis on spiritual reality, and a de-emphasis of material reality, encourage escape from mundane realities into fantasy? Sixthly, what dynamics are involved in the organisational component of the New Spirituality? What are the issues of power and conflict that arise between those who subscribe to the New Spirituality and those who subscribe to traditional religious forms of spirituality within religious organisations? What are the issues of power and conflict that arise in New Age 219 settings – between New Age/Human Potential entrepreneurs themselves, between members of their audiences and/or clientele, and between leaders and followers? What form of hierarchy exists in New Age settings? Is decision making within New Age organisations of a democratic nature or otherwise? To what extent are New Age organisations structured like business enterprises, and to what extent do they take the form of a community organisation or some alternative design? It remains to be seen whether the beliefs, and means and methods used by adherents of the New Spirituality manage to bring about positive social change on a large scale. Despite the New Age movement’s claims that its philosophy, means, and methods will serve to “change the planet” by raising human consciousness, healing people on a physical, mental, emotional, and spiritual level, and saving/restoring the natural environment, there currently seems to be little evidence of substantial progress in any of these domains. Despite the anti-materialist and counter-capitalist underpinnings of the New Age movement, New Age beliefs and practices have become just one more range of commodities in the open market. It seems that the New Age movement may in practice, reinforce the capitalistic nature of society rather than weaken it. What we need to know is whether the New Spirituality’s rejection of traditional religious doctrine and authority has enhanced, and is enhancing, people’s lives or if this non-religious variety of spirituality involves forms of hierarchy, bigotry, conflict, and power-seeking that are in essence, little different to what the early membership of the New Age movement sought to overturn. It may be that the New Spirituality’s quest for freedom from the perceived tyranny of institutionalised religion, and the seeking of creative self-expression, self-fulfilment, and self-actualisation, are simply helping to create the conditions for the unleashing of a different form of tyranny – the tyranny of self. 220 List of references Abbotts, J.E., Williams, R.G.A., Sweeting, H.N., & West, P.B. (2004). Is going to church good or bad for you? Denomination, attendance and mental health of children in West Scotland. Social Science and Medicine, 58, 645-656. Achenbach, T.M. (1991). Intergrative Guide for the 1991 CBCL/4-18, YSR, and TRF Profiles. Burlington, VT: University of Vermont Department of Psychiatry Achenbach, T.M. (1997). Manual for the Young Adult Self-Report and Young Adult Behaviour Checklist Burlington, VT: University of Vermont, Department of Psychiatry Aldred, L. (2002). "Money is just spiritual energy": Incorporating the New Age. Journal of Popular Culture, 35(4), 61-74. Allport, G.W. (1950). The individual and his religion New York: Macmillan Allport, G.W. (1959). Religion and prejudice. Crane Review, 2, 1-10. American Psychiatric Association (2000). American Psychiatric Association: Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association Argyle, M. (1959). Religious Behavior Glencoe, IL: Free Press Argyle, M., & Beit-Hallahmi, B. (1975). The Social Psychology of Religion London: Routledge & Kegan Paul Arnett, J.J., & Jensen, L.A. (2002). A congregation of one: Individualized religious beliefs among emerging adults. Journal of Adolescent Research, 17(5), 451-467. Association of Religion Data Archives (2001). Religion and Public Life Survey, 2001: Available on-line at: www.TheARDA.com (Accessed 9 February 2005). Australian Bureau of Statistics (1996). Australian Standard Classification of Religious Groups (ASCRG), 1996. Cat. No. 1266.0. Canberra, ACT: ABS. Australian Bureau of Statistics (2001a). 2001 Census of Population and Housing. Cat. No. 2015. Canberra, ACT: ABS. Australian Bureau of Statistics (2001b). Census of Population and Housing - The 2001 Census, Religion and the Jedi: Available on-line at: http://www.abs.gov.au/websitedbs/D3110124.NSF/0/86429d11c45d4e73ca256a40 0006af80?OpenDocument (Accessed 4 November 2004). Australian Bureau of Statistics (2002). 2001 Census of Population and Housing - Factsheet: Classification of Pentecostal Religious Affiliation in the 2001 Census. Cat. No. 2970.0.55.015. Canberra, ACT: ABS. Australian Bureau of Statistics (2003). Australian Social Trends. Cat. No. 4102.0 Canberra, ACT: ABS. Australian Bureau of Statistics (2004a). Measuring Social Capital: An Australian Framework of Indicators. Canberra, ACT: ABS. Australian Bureau of Statistics (2004b). Australian Social Trends: Religious Affiliation and Activity. Cat. No. 4102.0. Canberra, ACT: ABS. Bader, C., Dougherty, K., Froese, P., Johnson, B., & Menckson, F.C. (2006). American Piety in the 21st Century: New Insights to the Depth and Complexity of Religion in the US. Waco, Texas: Baylor University. Baetz, M., Larson, D.B., Marcoux, G., Bowen, R., & Griffin, R. (2002). Canadian psychiatric inpatient religious commitment: An association with mental health. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 47(2), 159-165. 221 Baetz, M., Griffin, R., Bowen, R., Koenig, H.G., & Marcoux, E. (2004). The association between spiritual and religious involvement and depressive symptoms in a Canadian population. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 192(12), 818-822. Bainbridge, W.S., & Stark, R. (1980). Client and audience cults in America. Sociological Analysis, 41, 119-214. Bainbridge, W.S. (2004a). Religion and science. Futures, 36(9), 1009-1023. Bainbridge, W.S. (2004b). After the new age. Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 43(3), 381- 394. Bainbridge, W.S. (2004c). Thinking about religious futures. Futures, 36(9), 943-946. Baker, M., & Gorusch, R. (1982). Trait anxiety and intrinsic-extrinsic religiousness. Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 21, 119-122. Bash, A. (2004). Spirituality: the emperor's new clothes? Journal of Clinical Nursing, 13, 11-16. Batson, C.D., Schoenrade, P., & Ventis, W.L. (1993). Religion and the Individual: A Social Psychological Perspective New York: Oxford University Press Bedford, G.S., & Foulds, G.A. (1977). Validation of the Delusions-Symptoms-States Inventory. British Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 15, 387-394. Beit-Hallahmi, B. (2001). "O Truant Muse": Collaborationism and research integrity. In B. Zablocki, & T. Robbins (Eds.), Misunderstanding Cults (pp. 35-70). Toronto: University of Toronto Press. Bellah, R.N. (1970). Beyond Belief: Essays on Religion in a Post-Traditional World New York: Harper & Row Bellamy, J., & Castle, K. (2004). 2001 Church Attendance Estimates, NCLS Occasional Paper 3. Sydney South: NCLS Research. Benda, B.B., & Corwyn, R.F. (1997). Religion and delinquency: The relationship after considering family and peer influences. Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 36(1), 81- 92. Benda, B.B., & Toombs, N.J. (2000). Religiosity and violence: Are they related after considering the strongest predictors? Journal of Criminal Justice, 28, 483-496. Berger, P. (1968). A bleak outlook is seen for religion, New York Times (p. 3). Bergin, A.E. (1983). Religiosity and mental health - a critical reevaluation and meta-analysis. Professional and Social Psychology, 14(2), 170-184. Bergin, A.E., Masters, K.S., & Richards, P.S. (1987). Religiousness and mental health reconsidered: A study of an intrinsically religious sample. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 34(2), 197-204. Bergin, A.E., Stinchfield, T.A., Gaskin, T.A., Masters, K.S., & Sullivan, R. (1988). Religious life-styles and mental health: An exploratory study. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 35(1), 91-98. Besecke, K. (2005). Seeing invisible religion: Religion as a societal conversation about transcendent meaning. Sociological Theory, 23(2), 179-196. Beyer, P. (2003). Conceptions of religion: On distinguishing scientific, theological and "official" meanings. Social Compass, 50(2), 141-160. Bhugra, D. (1996). Psychiatry and Religion London: Routledge Blass, D.M. (2001). A conceptual framework for the interaction between psychiatry and religion. International Review of Psychiatry, 13, 79-85. 222 Blavatsky, H.P. (1888). The Secret Doctrine: The Synthesis of Science, Religion and Philosophy: Theosophical University Press Online Edition. Available on-line at: http://www.theosociety.org/pasadena/sd/sd-hp.htm (Accessed 26 February 2007). Bouma, G.D. (1998). New Religions in Australia: Cultural Diffusion in Action. In M. Cousineau (Ed.), Religion in a Changing World: Comparative Studies in Sociology (pp. 203- 212). Westport, CT: Praeger. Braam, A.W., Beckman, A.T.R., Deeg, D.H.G., Smit, J.H., & van Tilburg, W. (1997). Religiosity as a protective or prognostic factor of depression in later life; results from a community study in the Netherlands. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 96(199-205). Bradburn, N.M. (1969). The Structure of Psychological Well-being Chicago, IL: Aldine Brewerton, T.D. (1994). Hyperreligiosity in psychotic disorders. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 182, 302-304. British Broadcasting Corporation (2002). Jedi 'religion' grows in Australia. United Kingdom: BBC News Available on-line at: http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/entertainment/film/2218456.stm (Accessed 4 November 2004). Brown, D.G., & Lowe, W.L. (1951). Religious beliefs and personality characteristics of college students. Social Behavior and Personality, 33, 239-242. Brown, L.B. (1962). A study of religious belief. British Journal of Psychology, 53, 259-272. Burrows, R. (1986). Americans get religion in the New Age. Christianity Today, 16, 7. Cable News Network (1999). CNN-Gallup poll for December 1999, Religion Today. United States of America: USA Today. Campbell, C. (2001). A New Age theodicy for a new age. In L. Woodhead,P. Heelas, & D. Martin (Eds.), Peter Berger and the Study of Religion (pp. 73-84). London: Routledge. Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (2003). Canada has 20,000 Jedis: Radio-Canada.ca Available on-line at: http://www.cbc.ca/news/story/2003/05/13/census_religion030513.html (Accessed 4 November 2004). Canadian Press (2003). Some 20,000 Canadians worship at the altar of Yoda: Canada.com Available on-line at: http://www.canada.com/national/features/census/story.html?id=A4623A62-5195- 4B57-B40B-087D8F38CF6F (Accessed 4 February 2004). Chandler, R. (1988). Understanding the New Age Dallas, TX: Word Christenfeld, N.J.S., Sloan, R.P., Carroll, D., & Greenland, S. (2004). Risk factors, confounding, and the illusion of statistical control. Psychosomatic Medicine, 66, 868-875. Clark, C.A., Worthington, E.L., Jr., & Danser, D.B. (1988). The transmission of religious beliefs and practices from parents to firstborn early adolescent sons. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 50, 463-472. Coleman, J. (1990). Foundations of Social Theory Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Corrigan, P., McCorkle, B., Schell, B., & Kidder, K. (2003). Religion and spirituality in the lives of people with serious mental illness. Community Mental Health Journal, 36(6), 487- 499. Cotton, S., Zebracki, K., Rosenthal, S.L., Tsevat, J., & Drotar, D. (2006). Religion/spirituality and adolescent health outcomes: A review. Journal of Adolescent Health, 38, 472-480. Cox, H.G. (1995). Fire from heaven: The rise of pentecostalist spirituality and the reshaping of religion in the twenty-first century Reading, Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley 223 D'Antonio, M. (1992). Heaven on Earth: Dispatches from America's Spiritual Frontier New York: Crown D'Souza, R. (2002). Do patients expect psychiatrists to be interested in spiritual issues? Australasian Psychiatry, 10(1), 44-47. Davie, G. (2004). New approaches to the sociology of religion: A Western perspective. Social Compass, 51(1), 73-84. Davis, T.L., Kerr, B.A., & Kurpius, S.E.R. (2003). Meaning, purpose, and religiosity in at-risk youth: The relationship between anxiety and spirituality. Journal of Psychology and Theology, 31, 356-365. Deratogis, L.R., & et al (1974). The Hopkins Symptoms Checklist (HSCL): A self-report symptom inventory. Behavioral Scientist, 19, 1-15. Donahue, M.J. (1998). Prevalence and correlates of New Age Beliefs in six Protestant denominations. Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 32(2), 177-184. Durkheim, E. (1952 [1897]). Suicide: A Study in Sociology London: Routledge and Kegan Paul Durkheim, E. (1968 [1915]). The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life London: George Allen & Unwin Ltd Durkheim, E. (1982 [1897]). The Rules of Sociological Method and Selected Text on Sociology and its Method London: Macmillan Press Eisen, S.V., Shaul, J.A., Leff, H., Stringfellow, V., Clarridge, B.R., & Cleary, P.D. (2001). Toward a national consumer survey: Evaluation of the CABHS and MHSIP instruments. Journal of Behavioral Health Services and Research, 28, 347-369. Ellis, A. (1988). Is religiosity pathological? Free Inquiry, 18, 27-32. Ellis, A. (1992). Do I really hold that religiousness is irrational and equivalent to emotional disturbance? American Psychologist, 47(3), 428-429. Emmons, C.F., & Sobal, J. (1981). Paranormal beliefs: Functional alternatives to mainstream religion? Review of Religious Research, 22, 301-312. Epstein, L., Tamir, A., & Natan, T. (1985). Emotional health state of adolescents. International Journal of Adolescent Medicine and Health, 1, 13-22. Farlex Inc (2004). Jedi (census): Available on-line at: http:/www.encyclopedia.thefreedictionary.com/Jedi%20(census) (Accessed 4 November 2004). Fehr, L.A., & Heintzelman, M.E. (1977). Personality and attitude correlates of religiosity: A source of controversy. Journal of Psychology, 95, 63-66. Ferdinand, R., & Verhulst, F. (1995). Psychopathology from adolescence into young adulthood: an 8-year follow-up study. American Journal of Psychiatry, 152, 586-584. Finney, J.R., & Malony, H.N. (1985). An empirical study of contemplative prayer as an adjunct to psychotherapy. Journal of Psychology and Theology, 13, 284-290. Folkman, S. (1997). Positive psychological states and coping with severe stress. Social Science and Medicine, 45, 1207-1221. Folkman, S., & Greer, S. (2000). Promoting psychological well-being in the face of serious illness: When theory, research and practice inform each other. Psycho-Oncology, 9, 11-19. Follett, M.P. (1918). The new state: Group organization the solution of popular government London: Longmans, Green Fox, M. (1983). Original Blessing: A Primer in Creation Spirituality Sante Fe, NM: Bear and Co 224 Francis, L.J., & Kaldor, P. (2002). The relationship between psychological well-being and Christian faith and practice in an Australian population sample. Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 41(1), 179-184. Frenz, A.W., & Carey, M.P. (1989). Relationship between religiousness and trait anxiety: Fact or artifact? Psychological Reports, 65, 827-834. Freud, S. (1961 [1927]). The future of an illusion New York: Norton Gall, T.L., Charbonneau, C., Clarke, N.H., Grant, K., Joseph, A., & Shouldice, L. (2005). Understanding the nature and role of spirituality in relation to coping and health: A conceptual framework. Canadian Psychology, 46(2), 88-104. Gartner, J. (1996). Religious commitment, mental health, and prosocial behavior: A review of the empirical literature. In E.P. Shafranske (Ed.), Religion and Clinical Practice of Psychology (pp. 187-214). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. George, L.K., Larson, D.B., Koenig, H.G., & McCullough, M.E. (2000). Spirituality and health: What we know, what we need to know. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 19(1), 102-116. Getz, G.E., Fleck, D.E., & Strakowski, S.M. (2001). Frequency and severity of religious delusions in Christian patients with psychosis. Psychiatry Research, 103, 87-91. Gill, R., Hadaway, C.K., & Marler, P.L. (1998). Is religious belief declining in Britain? Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 37(3), 507-516. Gilley, G.E. (1999). Think on these things. Available on-line at: http://www.rapidnet.com/~jbeard/bdm/Psychology/char/more/bless.htm (Accessed 19 January 2007). Goldberg, L.R. (in press). The comparative validity of adult personality inventories: Applications of a consumer-testing framework. In S.R. Briggs,J.M. Cheek, & E.M. Donahue (Eds.), Handbook of adult personality inventories. New York: Plenum. Good, M., & Willoughby, T. (2006). The role of spirituality versus religiosity in adolescent psychosocial adjustment. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 35(1), 41-55. Gorusch, R.L. (1984). Measurement: The boon and bane of investigating religion. American Psychologist, 38, 228-236. Greening, L., & Stoppelbein, L. (2002). Religiosity, attributional style, and social support as psychosocial buffers for African and While adolescents' perceived risk for suicide. Suicide and Life Threatening Behavior, 33(4), 404-417. Greenleaf, R.K. (1970). The leader as servant Indianapolis, IN: Robert K. Greenleaf Center for Servant Leadership Greenleaf, R.K. (1988). Spirituality as leadership Indianapolis, IN: Robert K. Greenleaf Center for Servant Leadership Gunnoe, M.L., & Moore, K.A. (2002). Predictors of religiosity among youth aged 17-22: A longitudinal study of the National Survey of Children. Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 41(4), 613-622. Gupta, A. (1983). Mental health and religion. Asian Journal of Psychology Education, 11, 8-13. Hadaway, C.K., & Marler, P.L. (2005). How many Americans attend worship each week? An alternative approach to measurement. Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 44(3), 307- 322. Hassan, M.K., & Khalique, A. (1981). Religiosity and its correlates in college students. Journal of Psychological Researches, 25, 129-136. 225 Hawkins, J.D., Catalano, R.F., Kosterman, R., Abbott, R., & Hill, K.G. (1999). Preventing adolescent health-risk behaviours by strengthening protection during childhood. Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, 153(3), 226-234. Heelas, P. (1993). The New Age in cultural context: the premodern, the modern and the postmodern. Religion, 23, 103-116. Heintzelman, M.E., & Fehr, L.A. (1976). Relationship between religious orthodoxy and three personality variables. Psychological Reports, 38, 756-758. Hertsgaard, D., & Light, H. (1984). Anxiety, depression, and hostility in rural women. Psychological Reports, 55, 653-674. Hill, P.C., Pargament, K.I., Hood Jr, R.W., McCullough, M.E., Swyers, J.P., Larson, D.B., & Zinnbauer, B.J. (2000). Conceptualizing Religion and Spirituality: Points of Commonality; Points of Departure. Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour, 30(1), 51-77. Hood, R.W. (1975). The construction and preliminary validation of a measure of reported mystical experience. Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 14, 29-41. Houtman, D., & Mascini, P. (2002). Why do churches become empty, while New Age grows? Secularization and religious change in the Netherlands. Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 41(3), 455-473. Huffine, C.L., & Aerts, E. (1998). Longitudinal Studies of Children and Families, 1928 - Present: A Guide to the Data Archives. Berkeley, California: The Intergenerational Studies at the Institute of Human Development, University of California, Berkeley. Hunt, D., & McMahon, T.A. (1988). America: The Sorcerer's New Apprentice Eugene, OR: Harvest House Introvigne, M. (2002). "There is no place for us to go but up": New Religious Movements and violence. Social Compass, 49(2), 213-244. Introvigne, M. (2004). The future of new religions. Futures, 36(9), 979-990. Jaspers, K. (1963). General Psychopathology Manchester: Manchester University Press Johnson, B.R., De Li, S., Larson, D.B., & McCullough, M. (2000). A systematic review of the religiosity and delinquency literature. Journal of Contemporary Criminal Justice, 16, 32-52. Jones, H., Delespaul, P., & Van Os, J. (2003). In debate: Jaspers was right after all - delusions are distinct from normal beliefs. British Journal of Psychiatry, 183, 285-286. Joseph, M. (1998). The effect of strong religious beliefs on coping with stress. Stress Medicine, 14, 219-224. Kaldor, P., Hughes, P., Castle, K., & Bellamy, J. (2004). Spirituality and Wellbeing in Australia, NCLS Occasional Paper 6. Sydney South: NCLS Research. Kaufman, W. (1997). Marcus Aurelius Meditations. In P. Negri (Ed.). Mineola, NY: Dover Publications Inc. Keeping, J.D., Najman, J.M., Morrison, J., Western, J.S., Andersen, M.J., & Williams, G.M. (1989). A prospective longitudinal study of social, psychological and obstetric factors in pregnancy. British Journal of Obstetric Gynaecology, 96, 289-297. Kelley, J., & De Graff, N.D. (1997). National context, parental socialization, and religious belief: Results from 15 nations. American Sociological Review, 62(4), 639-659. Kepel, G. (1991). Die Rache Gottes. Radikale Moslems, Christen und Juden auf dem Vormarsch [The Revenge of God. Radical Moslems, Christians and Jews on the March] Munchen [Munich]: CH Beck King, M., Jones, L., Barnes, K., Low, J., Walker, C., Wilkinson, S., Mason, C., Sutherland, J., & Tookman, A. (2005). Measuring spiritual belief: development and standardization of a Beliefs and Values Scale. Psychological Medicine, 36, 1-9. 226 Kirkpatrick, L.A. (1989). A psychometric analysis of the Allport, Ross and Feagin measures of intrinsic-extrinsic religious orientation. In M. Lynn, & D. Moberg (Eds.), Research in the Social Scientific Study of Religion (pp. 1-30). Greenwick, CT: JAI Press. Kirmayer, L.J., Malus, M., & Boothroyd, L.J. (1996). Suicide attempts among Inuit youth: a community survey of prevalence and risk factors. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 94(1), 8- 17. Kirov, G., Kemp, R., Kirov, K., & David, A. (1998). Religious faith after psychotic illness. Psychopathology, 31, 234-245. Knoblauch, D.L. (1985). Applying Taoist thought to counseling and psychotherapy. American Mental Health Counselors Association, 7, 52-63. Koenig, H.G., Cohen, H.J., Blazer, D.G., Pieper, C., Meador, K.G., Shelp, R., Goli, V., & DiPasquale, R. (1992). Religious coping and depression in elderly hopsitalized medically ill men. American Journal of Psychiatry, 149(1), 693-700. Koenig, H.G., Cohen, H.J., Blazer, D.G., Kudler, H.S., Krishnan, K.R., & Sibert, T.E. (1995). Cognitive symptoms of depression and religious coping in elderly medical patients. Psychosomatics, 36(369-375). Koenig, H.G., George, L.K., & Peterson, B.I. (1998). Religiosity and remission from depression, in medically ill older patients. American Journal of Psychiatry, 155, 536-542. Koenig, H.G., & Larson, D.B. (2001). Religion and mental health: evidence for an association. International Review of Psychiatry, 13(67-78). Koopmans, P.C., Sanderman, R., Timmermans, I., & Emmelkamp, P.M.G. (1994). The Irrational Beliefs Inventory: Development and psychometric evaluation. European Journal of Psychological Adjustment, 10, 15-27. Kovacs, M., & Beck, A. (1977). An empirical clinical approach toward a definition of childhood depression. In J. Schulterbrant, & A. Raskin (Eds.), Depression in Childhood: Diagnosis, Treatment, and Conceptual Models. New York: Raven Press. Krause, N. (1993). Measuring religiosity in later life. Research on ageing, 15, 170-197. Kroll, J., & Sheehan, W. (1989). Religious beliefs and practices among 52 psychiatric inpatients in Minnesota. American Journal of Psychiatry, 146, 67-72. Laroi, F., & Van der Linden, M. (2005). Metacognitions in proneness towards hallucinations and delusions. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 43(11), 1425-1441. Laroi, F., Van der Linden, M., DeFruyt, F., van Os, J., & Aleman, A. (2006). Associations between delusion proneness and personality structure in non-clinical participants: Comparison between young and elderly samples. Psychopathology, 39(5), 218-226. Larson, D.B., Larson, S.S., & Koenig, H.K. (2001). The patient's spiritual/religious dimension: A forgotten factor in mental health. Directions in Psychiatry, 21, 307-344. Larson, D.B., & Larson, S.S. (2003). Spirituality's potential relevance to physical and emotional health: A brief review of quantitative research. Journal of Psychology and Theology, 31(1), 37-51. Laubach, M. (2004). The social effects of psychism: spiritual experience and the construction of privatized religion. Sociology of Religion, 65(3), 239-263. Lea, G. (1982). Religion, mental health, and clinical issues. Journal of Religion and Health, 21, 336- 351. Leibowitz, M.R. (1993). Mixed anxiety and depression: should it be included in the DSM-IV? Treatment strategies for complicated anxiety. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 54, 4-7. 227 Levin, J.S., & Vanderpool, H. (1987). Is frequent religious attendance really conducive to better health?: Toward an epidemiology of religion. Social Science and Medicine, 24, 589- 600. Lopez-Ilundain, J.M., Perez-Nievas, F., Otero, M., & Mata, I. (2006). Peter's delusions inventory in Spanish general population: Internal reliability, factor structure and association with demographic variables (dimensionality of delusional ideation). Actas Espanolas de Psiquiatria, 34(2), 94-104. Luckmann, T. (1967). The Invisible Religion: The Problem of Religion in Modern Society London: Macmillan Luckmann, T. (2003). Transformations of religion and morality in Modern Europe. Social Compass, 50(3), 275-285. Lundberg, P., Cantor-Graae, E., Kabakyenga, J., Rukundo, G., & Ostergren, P. (2005). Prevalence of delusional ideation in a district in southwestern Uganda. Schizophrenia Research, 71(1), 27-34. Lyon, D. (1993). A bit of a circus: notes on postmodernity and New Age. Religion, 23, 117-126. MacDonald, D.A. (2002). The Expressions of Spirituality Inventory: Test development, validation, and scoring information. Maclaine, S. (1983). Out on a Limb New York: Bantam Books Malosh, L. (2004). A comparison of reasoning styles between actively delusional and delusion- prone individuals. Dissertation Abstracts International: Section B: The Sciences and Engineering, 65(5-B), 2661. Marty, M.E., & Appleby, R.S. (1991). Fundamentalisms observed Chicago: University of Chicago Press Marx, K. (1970 [1818-1883]). Critique of Hegel's 'Philosophy of Right'. In J. O'Malley (Ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Maslow, A.H. (1998). Maslow on Management New York: John Wiley Mauritzen, J. (1988). Pastoral care for the dying and bereaved. Death Studies, 12, 111-122. Mayo, C.C., Puryear, H.B., & Richek, H.G. (1969). MMPI correlates of religiousness in late adolescent college students. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 149, 381-385. McClure, R.F., & Loden, M. (1982). Religious activity, denominational membership and life satisfaction. Psychology, A Quarterly Journal of Human Behavior, 19, 13-17. McCullough, M.E., & Larson, D.B. (1999). Religion and depression: A review of the literature. Twin Research, 2, 126-136. McNamee, R. (2006). Confounding and confounders. Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 60, 227-234. Mears, D.P., & Ellison, C.G. (2000). Who buys new age materials? Exploring sociodemographic, religious, network, and contextual correlates of new age consumption. Sociology of Religion, 61(3), 289-313. Merkelbach, H., Horselenberg, R., & Muris, P. (2001). The Creative Experiences Questionnaire: A brief self-report measure of fantasy-proneness. Personality and Individual Differences, 31, 987-995. Morris, P.A. (1982). The effect of pilgrimage on anxiety, depression and religious attitude. Psychological Medicine, 12(291-294). National Church Life Survey (2004). NCLS Research. Sydney South, NSW: NCLS. Neeleman, J., & Lewis, G. (1994). Religious identity and comfort beliefs in three groups of psychiatric patients and a group of medical controls. International Journal of Psychiatry, 40, 123-134. 228 Office for National Statistics (2003a). 390,000 Jedis there are: but did hoax campaign boost response in teens and 20s?: Available on-line at: http://www.statistics.gov.uk (Accessed 4 February 2006). Office for National Statistics (2003b). Religion in Britain: Available on-line at: http://www.statistics.gov.uk (Accessed 4 November 2006). Office for National Statistics (2004). Focus on Religion: Available on-line at: http://www.statistics.gov.uk (4 Feburary 2006). Paloutzian, R.F., Richardson, J.T., & Rambo, L.R. (1999). Religious conversion and personality change. Journal of Personality, 67(6), 1048-1079. Pals, D.L. (1996). Seven Theories of Religion Oxford: Oxford University Press Pargament, K.I. (1997). The psychology of religion and coping New York: Guilford Press Pargament, K.I. (1999). The Psychology of Religion and Spirituality? Yes and No. International Journal for the Psychology of Religion, 9(1), 3-16. Pargament, K.I., Magyar-Russell, G.M., & Murray-Swank, N.A. (2005). The sacred and the search for significance: Religion as a unique process. Journal of Social Issues, 61(4), 665- 687. Pearce, M.J., Little, T.D., & Perez, J.E. (2003). Religiousness and depressive symptoms among adolescents. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 32(2), 267-276. Peters, E., Day, S., McKenna, J., & Orbach, G. (1999). Delusional ideation in religious and psychotic populations. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 38(1), 83-96. Peters, E., Joseph, S., Day, S., & Garety, P. (2004). Measuring delusional ideation: The 21-item Peters et al. Delusions Inventory (PDI). Schizophrenia Bulletin, 30(4), 1005-1022. Peters, E.R., & Garety, P.A. (1996). The Peters et al. Delusions Inventory (PDI): new forms for the 21-item version. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 18, 119. Peters, E.R., Joseph, S.A., & Garety, P.A. (1999). Measurement of delusional ideation in the normal population: Introducing the PDI (Peter et al. Delusions Inventory). Schizophrenia Bulletin, 25(3), 553-576. Petersen, L.R., & Roy, A. (1985). Religiosity, anxiety, and meaning and purpose: Religion's consequences for psychological well-being. Review of Religious Research, 27, 49-62. Phillips, R. (2004). Can rising rates of church participation be a consequence of secularization? Sociology of Religion, 65(2), 139-153. Piven, J.S. (2003). Death, neurosis, and normalcy: on the ubiquity of personal and social delusions. Journal of the American Academy of Religion, 71(1), 135-156. Poloma, M.M., & Hoelter, L.F. (1998). The 'Toronto Blessing': A holistic model of healing. Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 37(2), 257-272. Possamai, A. (2000). A profile of New Agers: social and spiritual aspects. Journal of Sociology, 36(3), 364-377. Poulton, R., Caspi, A., Moffitt, T.E., Cannon, M., Murray, R., & Harrington, H. (2000). Children's self-reported psychotic symptoms and adult schizophreniform disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 57, 1053-1058. Princeton Religion Research Center (2002). Many say religion increasing influence, but churchgoing flat. Emerging Trends, 24(1), 1-2. Pruyser, P. (1977). The seamy side of current religious beliefs. Bulletin of Menninger Clinicians, 41, 329-348. Putnam, R.D. (2000). Bowling Alone New York: Simon and Schuster 229 Quatro, S.A. (2004). New Age of Age Old: Classical management theory and traditional organized religion as underpinnings of the contemporary organizational spiritual movement. Human Resource Development Review, 3(3), 228-249. Raschke, C.A. (1996). New Age spirituality. In P.H. Van Ness (Ed.), Spirituality and the Secular Quest (pp. 203-221). New York: Crossroad Publishing Company. Raskin, R.N., & Hall, C.S. (1979). A narcissistic personality inventory. Psychological Reports, 45, 590. Redfield, J. (1993). Celestine Prophecy New York: Bantam Dell Publishing Group Resnick, M.D., Harris, L.J., & Blum, R.W. (1993). The impact of caring and connectedness on adolescent health and well-being. Journal of Paediatrics and Child Health, 29(Supplement 1), S3-9. Rew, L., & Wong, Y.J. (2006). A systematic review of associations among religiosity/spirituality and adolescent health attitudes and behaviors. Journal of Adolescent Health, 38, 433-442. Reynolds, C., & Richmond, B. (1978). Factor structure and construct validity of "what I think and feel": the revised children's manifest anxiety scale (RCMAS). Journal of Personality Assessment, 43, 281-283. Rice, T.W. (2003). Believe it or not: Religious and other paranormal beliefs in the United States. Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 42(1), 95-106. Robbins, J. (2004). The globalization of Pentecostal and Charismatic Christianity. Annual Review of Anthropology, 33, 117-143. Roof, W.C. (1993). A generation of seekers: The spiritual journeys of the baby-boomer generation San Francisco: Harper Collins Rupert, G.A. (1992). Employing the New Age: Training Seminars. In J.R. Lewis, & J.G. Melton (Eds.), Perspectives on the New Age. Albany: State University of New York. Sanua, V.D. (1969). Religion, mental health, and personality: A review of empirical studies. American Journal of Psychiatry, 125, 1203-1213. Saroglou, V., Pichon, I., Trompette, L., Verschueren, M., & Dernelle, R. (2005). Prosocial behavior and religion: new evidence based on projective measures and peer ratings. Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 44(3), 323-348. Saucier, G. (2000). Isms and the structure of social attitudes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 366-385. Saucier, G., & Skrzypinska, K. (2006). Spiritual but not religious? Evidence for two dispositions. Journal of Personality, 74(5), 1257-1292. Saunders, M. (2002). The link between religion and health: Psychoneuroimmunology and the faith factor. British Medical Journal, 324(7344), 1043. Schapman, A.M., & Inderbitzen-Nolan, H.M. (2002). The role of religious behaviour in adolescent depressive and anxious symptomatology. Journal of Adolescence, 25, 631-643. Scott, E.M. (1961). Presumed correlation between religion and mental health. Guild of Catholic Psychiatrists Bulletin, 8, 113-121. Sherkat, D.E., & Ellison, C.G. (1999). Recent developments and current controversies in the sociology of religion. Annual Review of Sociology, 25, 363-394. Shorto, R. (1997). Belief by the numbers. The New York Times Magazine, December 7, 60-61. Shreve-Neiger, A.K., & Edelstein, B.A. (2004). Religion and anxiety: A critical review of the literature. Clinical Psychology Review, 24, 379-397. Silberman, I. (2005). Religion as a meaning system: Implications for the New Millennium. Journal of Social Issues, 61(4), 641-663. 230 Simmel, G. (1997[1898-1918]). Georg Simmel, Essays on Religion Michigan: Yale University Simpson, G. (1952). Editor's preface. In G. Simpson (Ed.), Suicide: A study in sociology (pp. 9- 12). London: Routledge and Kegan Paul Ltd. Smith, J.Z. (1982). Imagining religion: From Babylon to Jonestown Chicago: University of Chicago Press Smith, W.C. (1991). The Meaning and End of Religion Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press Spanier, G.B. (1976). Measuring dyadic adjustment: New scales for assessing the quality of marriage and similar dyads. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 38, 15-28. Spellman, C., Baskett, G.D., & Byrne, D. (1971). Manifest anxiety as a contributing factor in religious conversion. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 36, 245-247. Spendlove, D.C., West, D.W., & Stanish, W.M. (1984). Risk factors in the prevalence of depression in Mormon women. Social Science Medicine, 18, 491-495. Spilka, B., & Werne, P.H. (1971). Religion and mental disorder: A research perspective. In M. Strommen (Ed.), Research on Religious Development: A Comprehensive Handbook (pp. 461- 481). New York: Hawthorn. Stark, R. (1999). Secularization, R.I.P.(rest in peace). Sociology of Religion, 60(3), 249-263. Steiner, R. (1998 [1924]). Anthroposophical Leading Thoughts London: Rudolf Steiner Press Stifler, K., Greer, J., Sneck, W., & Dovenmuehle, R. (2005). An empirical investigation of the discriminability of reported mystical experiences among religious contemplatives, psychotic inpatients, and normal adults. Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 32(4), 366-372. Stompe, T., Friedmann, A., Ortwein, G., Strobl, R., Chaudhry, H.R., Najam, N., & Chaudhry, M.R. (1999). Comparison of delusions among schizophrenics in Austria and in Pakistan. Psychopathology, 32, 224-234. Stompe, T., Ortwein-Swoboda, G., Ritter, K., & Schanda, H. (2003). Old wine in new bottles? Psychopathology, 36(1), 6-12. Sturgeon, R.S., & Hamley, R.W. (1979). Religiosity and anxiety. Journal of Social Psychology, 108, 37-138. Tapanya, S., Nicki, R., & Jarusawad, O. (1997). Worry and intrinsic/extrinsic religious orientation among Buddhist (Thai) and Christian (Canadian) elderly persons. Aging and Human Development, 44, 75-83. Taylor, F., Mitchell, J.E., Kenan, S., & Tacker, R. (2000). Attitudes of occupational therapists toward spirituality in practice. American Journal of Occupational Therapy, 54, 421-426. Tebbi, C.K., Mallon, J.C., Richards, M.E., & Bigler, L.R. (1987). Religiosity and locus of control of adolescent cancer patients. Psychological Reports, 61(3), 683-396. Tepper, L., Rogers, S.A., Coleman, F.M., & Maloney, H.N. (2001). The prevalence of religious coping among persons with persistent mental illness. Psychiatric Services, 52(5), 660-655. United States Bureau of the Census (2003). Statistical Abstracts of the United States. Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office. Unruh, A.M., Versnei, J., & Kerr, N. (2002). Spirituality unplugged: A review of commonalities and contentions, and a resolution. Canadian Journal of Occupational Therapists, 69(1), 5-19. Van Ness, P.H. (1996). Spirituality and the Secular Quest. New York: Crossroad Publishing Company. Varon, S.R., & Riley, A.W. (1999). Relationship between maternal church attendance and adolescent mental health and functioning. Psychiatric Services, 50(6), 799-805. 231 Vaughan, F. (1991). Spiritual issues in psychotherapy. Journal of Transpersonal Psychology, 23, 105- 119. Ventis, W.L. (1995). The relationships between religion and mental health. Journal of Social Issues, 51(2), 33-48. Verdoux, H., Maurice-Tison, S., Gay, B., Van Os, J., Salamon, R., & Bourgeois, M.L. (1998). A survey of delusional ideation in primary-care patients. Psychological Medicine, 28(28), 127- 134. Verdoux, H., van Os, J., Maurice-Tison, S., Gay, B., Salamon, R., & Bourgeois, M. (1998). Is early adulthood a critical developmental stage for psychosis proneness? A survey of delusional ideation in normal subjects. Schizophrenia Research, 29, 247-254. Verdoux, H., van Os, J., Maurice-Tison, S., Gay, B., Salamon, R., & Bourgeois, M.L. (1999). Increased occurrence of depression in psychosis-prone subjects: A follow-up study in primary care patients. 40, 6(462-468). Visser, J.H., van der Ende, J., Koot, H., & Verhulst, F. (2000). Predictors of psychopathology in young adults referred to mental health services in childhood or adolescence. British Journal of Psychiatry, 177, 59-65. Ware, J.E., Kosinski, M., & Keller, S.D. (1996). A 12-Item Short-Form Health Survey: Construction of scales and preliminary tests of reliability and validity. Medical Care, 34(3), 220-233. Ware, R.S., Williams, G.M., & Aird, R.L. (2006). Participants who left a multiple-wave cohort study had similar baseline characteristics to participants who returned. Annals of Epidemiology, 16(11), 820-823. Warner, R.S. (1993). Work in progress toward a new paradigm for the sociological study of religion in the United States. American Journal of Sociology, 98(5), 1044-1093. Weber, M. (1930). The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism London: Allen and Unwin Williams, D.R., Larson, D.B., Buckler, R.E., Heckmann, R.C., & Pyle, C.M. (1991). Religion and psychological distress in a community sample. Social Science Medicine, 32, 1257-1262. Williams, R.L., & Cole, S. (1968). Religiosity, generalized anxiety, and apprehension concerning death. Journal of Psychology and Theology, 11(226-235). Wilson, L. (1988). The aging of Aquarius. American Demographics, 10(9), 34. Wilson, W., & Miller, H.L. (1968). Fear, anxiety and religiousness. Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 7, 111. Wink, P., Dillon, M., & Larsen, B. (2005). Religion as moderator of the depression-health connection. Research on Aging, 27(2), 197-220. Wiznitzer, M., Verhulst, F., van den Brink, W., Koeter, M., van der Ende, J., Giel, R., & Koot, H. (1992). Detecting psychopathology in young adults: the Young Adult Self-Report, the General Health Questionnaire and the Symptom Checklist as screening instruments. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 86, 32-37. Wong, Y.J., Rew, L., & Slaikeu, K.D. (2006). A systematic review of recent research on adolescent religiosity/spirituality and mental health. Issues in Mental Health Nursing, 27, 161-183. Woodhead, L. (1993). Post-Christian spiritualities. Religion, 23, 167-181. World Health Organization (1993). WHO/NIH Joint Project on Diagnosis and Classification of Mental Disorders, and Alcohol- and Drug-Related Problems: Reliability and Validity Study. Geneva: WHO. 232 Wright, L.S., Frost, C.J., & Wisecarver, S.J. (1993). Church attendance, meaningfulness of religion, and depressive symptomatology among adolescents. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 22(5), 267-276. Wulff, D.M. (1996). The psychology of religion: An overview. In E.P. Shafranske (Ed.), Religion and the clinical practice of psychology (pp. 43-70). Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association. Wuthnow, R. (1978). Experimentation in American Religion Berkeley, CA: University of California Press Zinnbauer, B.J., Pargament, K.I., Cole, B.C., Rye, M.S., Butter, E.M., Belavich, T.G., Hipp, K.M., & Scott, A.B. (1997). Religion and spirituality: Unfuzzying the fuzzy. Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 36, 549-564. Zinnbauer, B.J., Pargament, K.I., & Scott, A.B. (1999). The emerging meanings of religiousness and spirituality: Problems and prospects. Journal of Personality, 67, 889-919. 233 Appendices 234 Appendix A: Domains of religion and spirituality Table A: Domains of religion/spirituality identified by the United States National Institute of Healthcare Research Domain Definition 1. Religious/spiritual preference or affiliation Membership in or affiliation with a specific religious or spiritual group 2. Religious/spiritual history Religious upbringing, duration of participation in religious or spiritual groups, life-changing religious or spiritual experiences, and “turning points” in religious participation or belief 3. Religious/spiritual participation Amount of participation in formal or spiritual groups or activities. 4. Religious/spiritual private practices Private behaviours or activities, including but not limited to prayer, meditation, reading sacred literature and watching or listening to religious or spiritual radio or television programs. 5. Religious/spiritual support Tangible and intangible forms of social support offered by the members of one’s religious or spiritual group. 6. Religious/spiritual coping The extent to which ways in which religious or spiritual practices are used to cope with stressful experiences. 7. Religious/spiritual beliefs and values Specific religious or spiritual beliefs and values. 8. Religious/spiritual commitment The importance of religion/spirituality relative to other areas of life and the extent to which religious or spiritual beliefs and practices serve to affect personal values and behaviour. 9. Religious/spiritual motivation for Most measures in this domain focus on regulating and reconciling relationships forgiveness, but other issues may be relevant as well (eg confession, atonement). 10. Religious/spiritual experiences Personal experience with the sacred, as reflected in emotions and sensations. Source: George et al. (2000:105) 235 Appendix B: Summary of studies on religion and anxiety Table B: Summary of studies examined in Shreve-Neiger’s and Edelstein’s (2004) review of the literature on religion and anxiety Authors Sample Religion measures Anxiety measures Analysis/methods Findings and observed effect/s 1. Hertsgaard 760 randomly selected Frequency of church attendance Scores on Multiple Stepwise regression analysis Beneficial: Church attended > once per month was & Light (1984) women living on farms in Affect Adjective Check significantly associated with lower anxiety scores. a Midwestern US state List Harmful: Catholic women were found to have higher (mean age = 44) (Zuckerman & Lubin anxiety scores than other women. 1965) 2. Williams et 720 participants in a Frequency of church attendance Symptom Checklist Regression analyses Beneficial: Religious attendance at Time 1 (1967) al. (1991) longitudinal study in Scale positively related to SCS scores (lower distress) at New Haven, CT. (Gurin, Veroff & Feld Time 2 (1969) (mean age = 44.8) 1960) More frequent church attendance is negatively related 2 measures of stressful to psychological distress, with religious attendance life events being found to buffer the impact of stressful life events and physical health complaints on psychological wellbeing 3. Petersen & Christian sample Frequency of church attendance Three-item anxiety scale Multiple regression analyses Beneficial: Church attendance was the only significant Roy (1985) (N=318) in Memphis, TN predictor of anxiety: more frequent attendance was associated with lower scores of anxiety 4. Williams & 161 college students Religious participation, including Maslow’s (1952) Religious participation scores Beneficial: Both the high and intermediate religiosity Cole (1968) church attendance, personal Security-Insecurity categorised into: ‘low religiosity’ groups were significantly more secure than the lower prayer, reading of religious Inventory (one SD below mean); religiosity group, but were not significantly different material, Sunday School ‘intermediate religiosity (-.14 to + from one another in indices of security attendance, church-related .14 SD); ‘high religiosity’ (one SD activity above mean). 5. Brown (1962) 203 undergraduates Intensity of religious beliefs Taylor Manifest Anxiety Beneficial: Higher manifest anxiety scores were (mean age = 22), (Thoules 1935), religious Scale (Taylor 1953) observed for those with no religious affiliation only University of Adelaide affiliation and attitudes Null: no differences were found in anxiety scores between different religious denominations 6. Finney & 9 non-psychotic adult Use of contemplative prayer as Speilberger State-Trait Relationship between time spent in Beneficial: Time spent in contemplative prayer related Malony (1985) Christian outpatients (3 an adjunct to psychotherapy Anxiety Inventory contemplative prayer and STAI to reduced anxiety males, 6 females; mean (Spielberger et al. 1983) scores examined age = 30.3) 7. Baker & 52 participants from a Intrinsic-Extrinsic religion Institute for Personality Correlational analyses Beneficial: Total trait anxiety significantly negatively Gorusch (1982) religious wilderness measure from the Religious and Ability Testing correlated with intrinsic religiousness. camp in Southern Orientation Scale (Allport & Anxiety Scale (Scheier & Harmful: Total trait anxiety scores were positively California Ross 1967) Cattell 1960) associated with extrinsic religiousness. 8. Bergin, 61 undergraduate Intrinsic-Extrinsic religion Taylor Manifest Anxiety Correlational analyses Beneficial: Total anxiety score negatively related to Masters & students at Brigham measure from the Religious Scale (Taylor 1953) intrinsic religiousness* Richards (1987) Young University Orientation Scale (Allport & Harmful: Significant and positive association between Ross 1967) extrinsic religion and manifest anxiety. *98.6% of the sample was intrinsically oriented 9. Sturgeon & 148 students from a Intrinsic-Extrinsic religion Speilberger State-Trait T tests on highest 20 scores Beneficial: The intrinsic group was significantly less Hamley (1979) conservative, measure from the Religious Anxiety Inventory (intrinsic) and lowest 20 scores existentially anxious and showed less trait anxiety than Protestant-affiliated Orientation Scale (Allport & (Spielberger et al. 1983) (extrinsic) the extrinsic group. 236 college Ross 1967); Inventory of and existential anxiety: Null: Groups did not differ on state anxiety. religious belief (Brown & Lowe (Good & Good 1974) 1951) 10. Tapanya, 104 non- Age Universal I-E Scale Penn State Worry Multiple regression analyses Beneficial: A significant negative correlation emerged Nicki & institutionalized, middle- (Gorusch & Venable 1983) – Questionnaire (Meyer et between intrinsic orientation and worry scores for Jarusawad class health older adult and adaptation of the Religious al. 1990) Buddhists, and Buddhist s were found to be more (1997) Buddhists (N=52) and Orientation Scale intrinsically and extrinsically oriented than Christians. Christians (N= 52). Intrinsic religion was found to be associated with lower levels of worry, especially for Buddhists. Harmful: Variance in PSWQ scores were uniquely related to a two-way interaction between extrinsic orientation and religious affiliation. There was a significant correlation between worry level and extrinsic orientation for Buddhists only. 11. Spellman, 3 equal-sized groups Sudden religious conversion Taylor Manifest Anxiety Orthogonal comparisons Harmful: Higher mean anxiety scores were observed Baskett & Byrne assigned into categories Categories: “non-religious” Scale (Taylor 1953) for the sudden covert group than the other two groups (1971) by two ministers of (mean age = 41.3); ‘’regular combined, which did not differ significantly from one members of a attenders” (mean age = 41.3); another. predominantly “sudden converts” (mean age = Protestant farming 36.9) community (N=60) 12. Wilson & 100 undergraduates Church attendance, belief in a Taylor Manifest Anxiety Correlational analyses Harmful: Religiosity positively associated with fear and Miller (1968) from the University of supreme power, soul Scale (Taylor 1953) anxiety. Alabama immortality, and religious Beneficial: Intrinsic religion associated with less immortality. anxiety. Harmful: Extrinsic religion associated with higher anxiety. 13. 82 undergraduate Thoules Test of Religious Taylor Manifest Anxiety Correlational analysis Null: No significant relationship was found between Heintzelman & students from the Orthodoxy (Brown 1962, Scale (Taylor 1953) religiosity and anxiety. Fehr (1976) University of Cincinnati Thoules 1935) (41 males, 41 females; mean age = 20.6) 14. Fehr & 120 undergraduate Thoules Test of Religious Taylor Manifest Anxiety Correlational analysis Null: No significant relationship was found between Heintzelmann students from the Orthodoxy (Brown 1962, Scale (Taylor 1953) religiosity and anxiety. (1977) University of Cincinnati Thoules 1935) (60 males, 60 females; mean age = 19.8) 15. Frenz & 119 undergraduate Intrinsic/Extrinsic Scale (Feagin Trait version of the Participants were categorised into Null: The four groups did not differ on trait anxiety, and Carey (1989) students from a private 1964) – a 12-item adaptation of Speilberger State-Trait four groups: ‘intrinsic’ (N=12), correlations between trait anxiety and continuous university in New York the Religious Orientation Scale Anxiety Inventory ‘extrinsic’ (N=46), indiscriminate’ scores on the intrinsic/extrinsic subscales were also (76 females, 43 males) (Spielberger et al. 1983) (N=41), and ‘nonreligious’ (N=20). non-significant. Correlational analyses. 16. Krause & 2107 participants in the Six items assessing 10-item checklist Structural equation modelling Null: Religiosity and stress were unrelated. Model 3 Van Tran National Survey of Black “organisational” and assessing stressful life testing 3 hypothetical models: had the highest goodness of fit – religious involvement (1989) Americans “nonorganisational” religiosity events including health, religion acts as a (1) moderator; was important in maintaining self-esteem, but these financial, and (2) suppressor, or (3) distress- effects operate independently of the amount of stress interpersonal problems. deterrent present. 237 Appendix C: Scales from the Young Adult Self Report Table C1: Items included in the YASR anxiety/depression subscale I feel lonely I lack self-confidence I feel confused or in a fog I am too fearful or anxious I cry a lot I feel too guilty I worry about my future I am self-conscious or easily embarrassed I am afraid I might think or do something bad I am unhappy, sad, or depressed I feel that I have to be perfect I worry a lot I feel that no one loves me I am too concerned about how I look I feel worthless or inferior I worry about my relations with the opposite sex I am nervous and tense =0 .91 Table C2: Items contained in the YASR externalising scale I brag I do things that may cause me trouble with the law I try to get a lot of attention I fail to pay debts or meet other financial responsibilities I get teased a lot I argue a lot I show off or clown I am mean to others I talk too much I don’t get along with other people I tease others a lot I get along badly with my family I am louder than others I feel that others are out to get me I use drugs (other than alcohol) for non-medical I get in many fights purposes I destroy things belonging to others I physically attack people I break rules at work, where I study, or elsewhere I scream or yell a lot I hang around with others who get in trouble I am stubborn, sullen, or irritable I lie or cheat My moods or feelings change suddenly I steal I have a hot temper I drink too much alcohol or get drunk I threaten to hurt people =0 .86 238 Appendix D: Scales from the Youth Self Report Table D: Items contained in the scales from the Youth Self Report Anxious/depressed Externalising Afraid might think or do something bad Don’t feel guilty Feel I have to be perfect Hang round with kids who get in trouble Nervous or tense Lie or cheat Fearful or anxious Rather be with older kids Feel too guilty Run away from home Self conscious and easily embarrassed Set fires Suspicious Steal at home Worry a lot Steal outside home Feel lonely Swear or use dirty language Cry a lot Argue a lot Deliberately try to hurt or kill self Brag Feel that no one loves me Mean to others Feel that others are out to get me Try to get a lot of attention Feel worthless or inferior Destroy own things Think about killing myself Destroy things belonging to others Unhappy sad or depressed = 0.84 Disobey at school Jealous of others Get in many fights Thought Physically attack people Can’t get mind off certain thoughts Scream a lot Hear sounds or voices that other people think Show off or clown aren’t there Stubborn Repeat several acts over and over Mood or feelings suddenly change See things that other people think aren’t there Talk too much Store things up I don’t need Tease others a lot Do things other people think are strange Hot temper Have thoughts other people think are strange Threaten to hurt people = .69 Louder than other kids =0 .87 239 Appendix E: Potential confounders for young adult religiosity Table E1: Potential confounders of associations between religious background and young adult belief in God Religious background Explanatory variables Maternal belief in Maternal church Maternal religious Variable tested God attendance affiliation Gender - - - Young adult age - - - Young adult education Yes Yes - Alcohol use - Yes - Cannabis use Yes Yes - Other substance use - - Yes Maternal age Yes Yes - Maternal education - - - Race Yes Yes - Family income in adolescence - - - Parents together until adulthood Yes Yes Yes Neighbourhood problems - - - Table E2: Potential confounders of associations between religious background and young adult belief in a spiritual or higher power other than God Religious background Explanatory variables Maternal belief in Maternal church Maternal religious Variable tested God attendance affiliation Gender - - - Young adult age - - - Young adult education - - - Alcohol use - - - Cannabis use Yes Yes - Other substance use - - Yes Maternal age - - - Maternal education - - - Race - - - Family income in adolescence - - - Parents together until adulthood Yes Yes Yes Neighbourhood problems - - - - Null relationship between test variable and either the explanatory or outcome variable, or both variables Yes: Potential confounder – test variable significantly associated with both the explanatory and outcome variables 240 Table E3: Potential confounders of associations between religious background and young adult church attendance Religious background Explanatory variables Maternal belief in Maternal church Maternal religious Variable tested God attendance affiliation Gender - - - Young adult age - - - Young adult education Yes Yes - Alcohol use - Yes - Cannabis use Yes Yes - Other substance use - - Yes Maternal age Yes Yes - Maternal education Yes Yes Yes Race Yes Yes - Family income in adolescence - - - Parents together until adulthood Yes Yes Yes Neighbourhood problems - - - - Null relationship between test variable and either the explanatory or outcome variable, or both variables Yes: Potential confounder – test variable significantly associated with both the explanatory and outcome variables 241 Appendix F: Potential confounders for anxiety/depression Table F: Potential confounders of associations between young adult religiosity and anxiety/depression Females Males Explanatory variables Explanatory variables Variable tested Belief in Belief in Church Belief in Belief in Church God S/HP attendance God S/HP attendance Young adult age - - - - - - Young adult education Yes - - - - - Young adult alcohol Yes Yes Yes - - - consumption Young adult cannabis use Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Young adult other Yes Yes Yes - Yes - substance use Maternal age - - - - - - Maternal education - - - - - - Race - - - - - - Family income in - - adolescence - - - - Parents together until adulthood Yes Yes Yes - Yes Yes Quality of neighbourhood - - - - Yes - - Null relationship between test variable and either the explanatory or explanatory variable, or both Yes Potential confounder – test variable significantly associated with both the explanatory variable and young adult anxiety/depression 242 Appendix G: Potential confounders for delusional ideation Table G1: Potential confounders of associations between religious background and religious ideation Young adults (females and males) Explanatory variables Maternal belief in Maternal church Maternal religious Variable tested God attendance affiliation Gender - - - Young adult age - - - Young adult education - - - Young adult alcohol consumption - Yes - Young adult cannabis use - - - Young adult other substance use - - - Maternal age Yes Yes - Maternal education Yes Yes Yes Race Yes Yes - Family income in adolescence - - - Parents together until adulthood Yes Yes Yes Neighbourhood problems - - - Table G2: Potential confounders of associations between young adult religiosity and total PDI scores Young adults (females and males) Explanatory variables Variable tested Belief in God Belief in S/HP Church attendance Gender - - - Young adult age - - Yes Young adult education - - - Young adult alcohol consumption - - - Young adult cannabis use Yes Yes Yes Young adult other substance use Yes Yes Yes Maternal age - - - Maternal education - - - Race - - - Family income in adolescence - - - Parents together until adulthood - Yes Yes Neighbourhood problems - Yes - - Null relationship between test variable and either the explanatory or outcome variable, or both Yes Potential confounder – test variable significantly associated with both the explanatory variable and young adult delusional ideation 243 Appendix H: Potential confounders for externalising behaviour Table H1: Potential confounders of associations between young adult religiosity variables and externalising behaviour Females Males Explanatory variables Explanatory variables Variable tested Belief in Belief in Church Belief in Belief in Church God S/HP attendance God S/HP attendance Young adult age - - - - - - Young adult education Yes - - - - - Maternal age - - - Yes - Yes Maternal education - - - - - - Race - - - - - - Family income in - - - - - - adolescence Parents remaining Yes Yes Yes - Yes Yes together until adulthood Neighbourhood - Yes - - Yes - problems Table H2: Potential confounders of associations between religious background and young adult externalising behaviour Females Males Explanatory variables Explanatory variables Variable tested Maternal Maternal Maternal Maternal Maternal Maternal belief in church religious belief in church religious God attendance affiliation God attendance affiliation Young adult age - - - - - - Young adult education Yes Yes - - - - Maternal age - - - Yes Yes Maternal education - - - - - - Race - Yes - - - - Family income in - - - - - - adolescence Parents remaining Yes Yes - - Yes - together until adulthood Neighbourhood - - - - - - problems - Null relationship between test variable and either the explanatory or outcome variable, or both Yes Potential confounder – test variable significantly associated with both the explanatory variable and externalising behaviour 244 While billions of people believe Jesus of Nazareth was one of the most important figures in world history, many others reject the idea that he even existed at all. A 2015 survey conducted by the Church of England, for instance, found that 22 percent of adults in England did not believe Jesus was a real person. Among scholars of the New Testament of the Christian Bible, though, there is little disagreement that he actually lived. Lawrence Mykytiuk, an associate professor of library science at Purdue University and author of a 2015 Biblical Archaeology Review article on the extra-biblical evidence of Jesus, notes that there was no debate about the issue in ancient times either. “Jewish rabbis who did not like Jesus or his followers accused him of being a magician and leading people astray,” he says, “but they never said he didn’t exist.” WATCH: Jesus: His Life in HISTORY Vault Archaeological evidence of Jesus does not exist. There is no definitive physical or archaeological evidence of the existence of Jesus. “There’s nothing conclusive, nor would I expect there to be,” Mykytiuk says. “Peasants don’t normally leave an archaeological trail.” “The reality is that we don’t have archaeological records for virtually anyone who lived in Jesus’s time and place,” says University of North Carolina religious studies professor Bart D. Ehrman, author of Did Jesus Exist? The Historical Argument for Jesus of Nazareth. “The lack of evidence does not mean a person at the time didn’t exist. It means that she or he, like 99.99% of the rest of the world at the time, made no impact on the archaeological record.” Questions of authenticity continue to surround direct relics associated with Jesus, such as the crown of thorns he reputedly wore during his crucifixion (one possible example is housed inside the Notre Dame Cathedral in Paris), and the Shroud of Turin, a linen burial cloth purportedly emblazoned with the image of his face. READ MORE: Who Wrote the Bible? The holy crown of thorns at the Notre Dame Cathedral in Paris. The holy crown of thorns at the Notre Dame Cathedral in Paris. Godong/UIG via Getty Images Archaeologists, though, have been able to corroborate elements of the New Testament story of Jesus. While some disputed the existence of ancient Nazareth, his biblical childhood home town, archaeologists have unearthed a rock-hewn courtyard house along with tombs and a cistern. They have also found physical evidence of Roman crucifixions such as that of Jesus described in the New Testament. READ MORE: Died Like Jesus? Rare Remains Suggest Man Was Crucified 2,000 Years Ago Documentary evidence outside of the New Testament is limited. The most detailed record of the life and death of Jesus comes from the four Gospels and other New Testament writings. “These are all Christian and are obviously and understandably biased in what they report, and have to be evaluated very critically indeed to establish any historically reliable information,” Ehrman says. “But their central claims about Jesus as a historical figure—a Jew, with followers, executed on orders of the Roman governor of Judea, Pontius Pilate, during the reign of the Emperor Tiberius—are borne out by later sources with a completely different set of biases.” Within a few decades of his lifetime, Jesus was mentioned by Jewish and Roman historians in passages that corroborate portions of the New Testament that describe the life and death of Jesus.Racism among white Christians is higher than among the nonreligious. That's no coincidence. For most of American history, the light-skinned Jesus conjured up by white congregations demanded the preservation of inequality as part of the divine order. Image: Church White Christians are consistently more likely than whites who are religiously unaffiliated to deny the existence of structural racism.Glasshouse Images / Getty Images July 27, 2020, 6:15 PM MDT By Robert P. Jones, author of "White Too Long: The Legacy of White Supremacy in American Christianity" Over the last several weeks, the United States has engaged in a long-overdue reckoning with the racist symbols of the past, tearing down monuments to figures complicit in slavery and removing Confederate flags from public displays. But little scrutiny has been given to the cultural institutions that legitimized the worldview behind these symbols: white Christian churches. In public opinion polls, a clear pattern has emerged: White Christians are consistently more likely than whites who are religiously unaffiliated to deny the existence of structural racism. A close read of history reveals that we white Christians have not just been complacent or complicit; rather, as the nation's dominant cultural power, we have constructed and sustained a project of perpetuating white supremacy that has framed the entire American story. The legacy of this unholy union still lives in the DNA of white Christianity today — and not just among white evangelical Protestants in the South, but also among white mainline Protestants in the Midwest and white Catholics in the Northeast. For more than two decades, I've studied the attitudes of religiously affiliated Americans across the country. And year over year, in question after question in public opinion polls, a clear pattern has emerged: White Christians are consistently more likely than whites who are religiously unaffiliated to deny the existence of structural racism. Related OPINION The decade that doomed White Christian America For example, surveys conducted by PRRI in 2018 found that white Christians — including evangelical Protestants, mainline Protestants and Catholics — are nearly twice as likely as religiously unaffiliated whites to say the killings of Black men by police are isolated incidents rather than part of a pattern of how police treat African Americans. And white Christians are about 30 percentage points more likely to say monuments to Confederate soldiers are symbols of Southern pride rather than symbols of racism. White Christians are also about 20 percentage points more likely to disagree with this statement: "Generations of slavery and discrimination have created conditions that make it difficult for Blacks to work their way out of the lower class." And these trends generally persist even in the wake of the recent protests for racial justice. One way to dismantle structural racism in America: Disband the two-party system JULY 14, 202005:07 As a white Christian who was raised Southern Baptist and shaped by a denominational college and seminary, it pains me to see these patterns in the data. Even worse, these questions only hint at the magnitude of the problem. To determine the breadth of these attitudes, I created a "Racism Index," a measure consisting of 15 questions designed to get beyond personal biases and include perceptions of structural injustice. These questions included the three above, as well as questions about the treatment of African Americans in the criminal justice system and general perceptions of race, racism and racial discrimination. Related OPINION We want to hear what you THINK. Please submit a letter to the editor. Even at a glance, the Racism Index reveals a clear distinction. Compared to nonreligious whites, white Christians register higher median scores on the Racism Index, and the differences among white Christian subgroups are largely differences of degree rather than kind. Not surprisingly, given their concentration in the South, white evangelical Protestants have the highest median score (0.78) on the Racism Index. But it is a mistake to see this as merely a Southern or an evangelical problem. The median scores of white Catholics (0.72) and white mainline Protestants (0.69) — groups that are more culturally dominant in the Northeast and the Midwest — are not far behind. Notably, the median score for each white Christian subgroup is significantly above the median scores of the general population (0.57), white religiously unaffiliated Americans (0.42) and Black Protestants (0.24). This disparity in attitudes about systemic racism between white Christians and whites who claim no religious affiliation is important evidence that the common — and catalyzing — denominator here is religious identity. This consistent perception gap was the central research finding that launched the work on my new book, "White Too Long: The Legacy of White Supremacy in American Christianity," out on Tuesday. When confronted with unsettling results such as these, many of my fellow white Christians tend to explain them away with two objections. First, they assert that it is not white Christian identity itself but other intervening variables that account for such correlations. Second, they argue that even if white Christian identity is implicated, the results are muddied by the inclusion of people who have no real connection to actual churches, folks who are "Christian in name only." Related OPINION Here's what getting rid of Mississippi's Confederate flag means — and doesn't But even when controls are introduced in a statistical model for a range of demographic characteristics, such as partisanship, education levels and region, the connection between holding racist attitudes and white Christian identity remains stubbornly robust. The results point to a stark conclusion: While most white Christians think of themselves as people who hold warm feelings toward African Americans, holding racist views is nonetheless positively and independently associated with white Christian identity. Again, this troubling relationship holds not just for white evangelical Protestants, but also for white mainline Protestants and white Catholics. The legacy of this unholy union still lives in the DNA of white Christianity today — and not just among white evangelical Protestants in the South. Moreover, these statistical models refute the assertion that attending church makes white Christians less racist. Among white evangelicals, in fact, the opposite is true: The relationship between holding racist views and white Christian identity is actually stronger among more frequent church attenders than among less frequent church attenders. I suspect many of my fellow white Christians will be appalled by these findings, asking with genuine dismay: "How can this be?" Haven't white Christians created charities of all kinds, built the infrastructure of much of our civil society and provided leadership on a host of social reforms, including the abolitionist movement, which was led in part by Christians moved by their faith? Before the civil rights movement, it was common to call something 'racist.' What happened? JULY 26, 201903:27 But when we allow ourselves to cast our gaze beyond the rosy stories we tell about ourselves as champions and representatives of all that is good in America, a terrifyingly troubled alternative history emerges. While it may seem obvious to mainstream white Christians today that slavery, segregation and overt declarations of white supremacy are antithetical to the teachings of Jesus, such a conviction is, in fact, a recent development for most white American Christians and churches, both Protestant and Catholic. The unsettling truth is that, for nearly all of American history, the light-skinned Jesus conjured up by most white congregations was not merely indifferent to the status quo of racial inequality; he demanded its defense and preservation as part of the natural, divinely ordained order of things. Related OPINION My alma mater is named for Robert E. Lee. It's more than statues that have to go. Consider the cultural context in which American Christianity, both Protestant and Catholic, was born. In the 18th and 19th centuries, as Protestant churches were springing up in newly settled territories after Native American populations were forcibly removed, it was common practice — observed, for example, at the Baptist church that was the progenitor of my parents' church in Macon, Georgia — for slaveholding whites to take enslaved people to church with them. Recommended OPINION Ivermectin is trash against Covid. That hasn't stopped its supporters. OPINION Subtracting SATs adds to colleges’ marketing tools — but equals a big mistake for students The practice had it that whites sat in the front while enslaved Blacks sat in the back or in specially constructed galleries above. In late 18th-century Maryland, one-fifth of those included in a Catholic census were enslaved people owned by white Catholics or white Catholic institutions. And as late as the 1940s, urban Catholic parishes in major cities such as New York still required Black members to sit in the back pews and approach the altar last to receive the bread and wine of the Eucharist. Moreover, the content of what was preached confirmed that white supremacy was part of the Christian worldview. Sermons, by necessity, tended to be light on the themes of freedom and liberation in Exodus, for example, and heavy on the mandates of obedience and being content in one's social station from the New Testament writings of Paul. In these seedbeds of American Christianity, an a priori commitment to white supremacy shaped what could be practiced (a slave master could not share a common cup of Christian fellowship with his slaves) and preached (white dominance and Black subservience were expressions of God's ideal for the organization of human societies). Such early distortions influenced how white Christians came to embody and understand their faith and determined what was handed down from one generation to the next. Our fellow African American citizens, and indeed the entire country, are waiting to see whether we white Christians can finally find the humility and courage and love to face the truth. The plain testimony of history is that, alongside what good we white Christians have done, white Christian theology and institutions have also declared the blessings of God on the enslavement of millions of African Americans, the construction of a brutal system of racial segregation enforced by law and lynchings, the resistance to the civil rights movement and the mass incarceration of millions of African Americans. When the patterns in the current public opinion data are seen in this light, they seem unsurprising and, indeed, inevitable. As monuments to white supremacy are falling all across America, a great cloud of witnesses is gathering. Our fellow African American citizens, and indeed the entire country, are waiting to see whether we white Christians can finally find the humility and courage and love to face the truth about our long relationship with white supremacy and to dismantle the Christian worldview we built to justify it. When a young Southern Baptist pastor named Alan Cross arrived in Montgomery, Ala., in January 2000, he knew it was where the Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr. had his first church and where Rosa Parks helped launched the famous bus boycott, but he didn't know some other details of the city's role in civil rights history. The more he learned, the more troubled he became by one event in particular: the savage attack in May 1961 on a busload of Black and white Freedom Riders who had traveled defiantly together to Montgomery in a challenge to segregation. Over the next 15 years, Cross, who is white, would regularly take people to the old Greyhound depot in Montgomery to highlight what happened that spring day. "They pull in right here, on the side," Cross said, standing in front of the depot. "And it was quiet when they got here. But then once they start getting off the bus, around 500 people come out – men, women and children. Men were holding the Freedom Riders back, and the women were hitting them with their purses and holding their children up to claw their faces." Some of the men carried lead pipes and baseball bats. Two of the Freedom Riders, the civil rights activist John Lewis and a white ally, James Zwerg, were beaten unconscious. Though he had grown up in Mississippi and was familiar with the history of racial conflict in the South, Cross was horrified by the story of the 1961 attack on the Freedom Riders. Montgomery was known as a city of churches. Fresh out of seminary, Cross had come there to preach the gospel of Jesus Christ. "Why didn't white Christians show up?" he recalled wondering. To his dismay, Cross learned that many of the people in the white mob were regular churchgoers. In the years that followed, he made it part of his ministry to educate his fellow Christians about the attack and prompt them to reflect on its meaning. "You think about the South being Christian, but this wasn't Christianity," Cross said. "So what happened here in the white church? How did we get to that point?" It's a question he explored in his 2014 book, When Heaven and Earth Collide: Racism, Southern Evangelicals, and the Better Way of Jesus. The answer to the question lies partly in U.S. history, beginning in the days of slavery and Jim Crow segregation, but not ending there. Elements of racist ideology have long been present in white Christianity in the United States. Racism from the pulpit Less than three weeks after the 1961 attack on the Freedom Riders, Montgomery's most prominent pastor, Henry Lyon Jr., gave a fiery speech before the local white Citizens' Council, denouncing the civil rights protesters and the cause for which they were beaten — from a "Christian" perspective. "Ladies and gentlemen, for 15 years I have had the privilege of being pastor of a white Baptist church in this city," Lyon said. "If we stand 100 years from now, it will still be a white church. I am a believer in a separation of the races, and I am none the less a Christian." The crowd applauded. "If you want to get in a fight with the one that started separation of the races, then you come face to face with your God," he declared. "The difference in color, the difference in our body, our minds, our life, our mission upon the face of this earth, is God given." Lyon saw himself as a devout Bible believer, and he was far from an extremist in the Southern Baptist world. A former president of the Alabama Baptist Convention, his Montgomery church had more than 3,000 members. Evangelical Christians Grapple With Racism As Sin AMERICA RECKONS WITH RACIAL INJUSTICE Evangelical Christians Grapple With Racism As Sin How respected people of God could openly promote racist views was a question that would trouble many Southerners in the years that followed. Among them was a young woman growing up in East Texas in the 1970s, Carolyn Renée Dupont. The girl's grandmother took her regularly to church, made her listen to sermons on the radio and gave her a quarter for every Bible verse she memorized. But the grandmother believed just as deeply in the superiority of the white race. "I asked her about that once," Dupont recalled, "and she said, 'I just don't believe Blacks should be treated the same as whites.' " Dupont, now a historian at Eastern Kentucky University, said the experience with her grandmother spurred her to focus her research on the racial views of Southern white evangelicals. "I wanted to understand what seemed like a central riddle about the South," she said. "The part of the country that was the most fervent about religious faith was also the one that practiced white supremacy most enthusiastically." It was the same question that bothered Cross as a young pastor in Montgomery. Slavery and the Bible At an earlier point in American history, some Christian theologians went so far as to argue that the enslavement of human beings was justifiable from a biblical point of view. James Henley Thornwell, a Harvard-educated scholar who committed huge sections of the Bible to memory, regularly defended slavery and promoted white supremacy from his pulpit at the First Presbyterian Church in Columbia, S.C., where he was the senior pastor in the years leading up to the Civil War. James Henley Thornwell regularly defended slavery and promoted white supremacy from his pulpit at the First Presbyterian Church in Columbia, S.C. A.H. Ritchie/The Collected Writings of James Henley Thornwell, 1871 "As long as that [African] race, in its comparative degradation, co-exists side by side with the white," Thornwell declared in a famous 1861 sermon, "bondage is its normal condition." Thornwell was a slave owner, and in his public pronouncements he told fellow Christians they need not feel guilty about enslaving other human beings. "The relation of master and slave stands on the same foot with the other relations of life," Thornwell insisted. "In itself, it is not inconsistent with the will of God. It is not sinful." The Christian Scriptures, Thornwell said, "not only fail to condemn; they as distinctly sanction slavery as any other social condition of man." RACE Racial Reconciliation Is An Individual Journey, Dallas Pastor Says Among the New Testament verses Thornwell could cite was the Apostle Paul's letter to the Ephesians where he writes, "Slaves, obey your human masters, with fear and trembling and sincerity of heart." (Biblical scholars now discount the relevance of the passage to a consideration of chattel slavery.) Thornwell's reassurance was immensely important to all those who had a stake in the existing economic and political system in the South. In justifying slavery, he was speaking not just as a theologian but as a Southern patriot. In the First Presbyterian cemetery, Thornwell's name appears prominently on a monument to church members who served the Confederate cause in the Civil War. "Slavery, in the minds of many, was necessary for the South to thrive," said Bobby Donaldson, director of the Center for Civil Rights History and Research at the University of South Carolina. "So Thornwell used his pulpit to defend the South against charges by the North, by abolitionists. ... He provided the intellectual defenses that many slaveholders needed." Thornwell's First Presbyterian congregation included slave owners and businessmen and other members of the political and economic elite in Columbia, and as their pastor he represented their interests. A belief in white supremacy was a foundational part of Southern culture, which is one reason some otherwise devout Christians have failed to challenge it. The Southern way Lyon's opening prayer before the white Citizens' Council meeting in Montgomery included words starkly reminiscent of the Civil War era. "We stand on the sacred soil of Alabama in the cradle of the Confederacy of our beloved Southland," he said. "Help us to realize with all of the fervency of our heart and mind that every inch of ground we stand on tonight is sacred and honorable." A fear that their regional culture was at risk lay behind much of the opposition to the civil rights movement among Southern Christians. Cross, the Montgomery pastor who was dismayed by what he learned of the attack on the Freedom Riders, ultimately decided that the best explanation for the involvement of Christians was that they were acting on the basis of their perceived self-interest. Jesus Was Divisive: A Black Pastor's Message To White Christians CODE SWITCH Jesus Was Divisive: A Black Pastor's Message To White Christians "People try to protect their way of life," he said. "You know, 'What's best for me and my family?' You even begin to use God as a means to an end. It makes a lot of sense to people, and they're, like, 'Well, that's what everybody does.' " A "don't-rock-the-boat" philosophy can have a powerful appeal among people who are unnerved by the prospect of social change, and church leaders may feel powerless to counter it. In 1965, Lyon's more moderate son, Henry Lyon III, was called to lead an all-white Baptist church in Selma, Ala. He arrived in the city two months after the "Bloody Sunday" confrontation on the Edmund Pettus Bridge, when more than 2,000 civil rights marchers were savagely attacked by Alabama state troopers and local law officers. The younger Lyon, who died in 2018, never adopted his father's bigoted rhetoric, and his wife, Sara Jane Lyon, said he was willing to open his church to African Americans. During the 21 years Lyon was the church's pastor, however, his congregation never accepted Black members, apparently because he did not feel free to press the issue. "Selma wasn't ready for it," Sara Jane Lyon told NPR in an interview. "He knew it would accomplish nothing if he upset everybody and pushed, you know, to integrate the church." Sara Jane Lyon volunteers at the First Baptist Church in Montgomery. She says her late husband, who led an all-white church for 21 years in Selma, Ala., felt that pushing for integration would upset his congregation and "accomplish nothing." Stephen Poff for NPR Churches operate within a cultural context. By challenging local customs and perspectives, pastors may alienate the white economic and political players who serve as their deacons, elders, Sunday School teachers and financial supporters. In his sermons, Sara Jane Lyon recalled, her husband would tell his congregation, "I have not come here to change your heart. There's no way I can do that. ... Only the Lord can change your heart." Asked whether her husband ever discussed racial justice as a pastor, she said, "That was not his style of preaching. He didn't get up and talk about local issues. He preached the Word of God." The church and the status quo After leaving Selma, the Lyons relocated to Montgomery and joined the First Baptist Church there. With about 5,000 members, the church has a central place in civic life. The congregation is almost entirely white, but it's not because of a deliberate policy. The pastor, Jay Wolf, said he welcomes everyone. Pastor Jay Wolf leads a prayer service at First Baptist Church in Montgomery in 2019. He says he has "no idea" how many African Americans are in his congregation. "We are the body of Christ, and we need Jesus, and that's all I need to know," he says. Stephen Poff for NPR "When I came to know the Lord, I became colorblind," Wolf said. When some visitors asked Wolf how many African Americans attended his church, he said he had "no idea." "I don't know how many white members we have," Wolf told NPR. "Like, does it make any difference? I just know that we have people, crafted in the image of God. I am completely resistant to this idea of breaking things down on a demographic basis. We are the body of Christ, and we need Jesus, and that's all I need to know." On the other side of Montgomery, where African Americans are concentrated, Pastor Terrence Jones also preaches about needing Jesus, though with a message attuned to a multiracial congregation. The son of a Black Southern Baptist preacher, Jones said he thinks the Christian church is partly to blame for America "dropping the ball," in his words, on race issues. Terrence Jones, pastor at the Montgomery church Strong Tower at Washington Park, says Christians need to focus on racism more seriously. Brooke Glassford "The message of Jesus is a unifying message," Jones said. "According to Ephesians 2, he tears down 'every dividing wall of hostility' through his death on the cross. I think we've done a poor job of showing the world that, because we've been so segregated." Jones argues that Christians need to focus on racism far more seriously. "When people get shot, when our president says something racially charged, people get pushed into their corners, and they don't wrestle with what does this mean for me as a minority, what does this mean for me as a white person, but also, what does this mean for me as a follower of Jesus?" At the time of the civil rights movement, King argued that church leaders needed to take a broad view of their mission and accept responsibility for addressing social inequity. In his 1963 Letter From a Birmingham Jail, written in longhand from his jail cell, King lamented the failure of "white churchmen" to stand up for racial justice when it meant challenging the local power structure. "So often the contemporary church is a weak, ineffectual voice with an uncertain sound," King wrote. "So often it is an arch-defender of the status quo. Far from being disturbed by the presence of the church, the power structure of the average community is consoled by the church's silent — and often even vocal — sanction of things as they are." A theology of inaction Some white Christian leaders have even provided moral and theological reasoning for their reluctance to challenge the existing system. Evangelicals in particular generally prioritize an individual's own salvation experience over social concerns. The primary mission of the church in this view is to win souls for Christ. Working for racial justice, in contrast, may be seen as a "political" issue. "In that configuration, immorality only lives in the individual person," said Dupont, the religion historian who grew up in Texas. "There's no conception of systemic injustice and systemic sin." Civil rights activists who cited the Bible in support of their cause were often dismissed as "a bunch of theological liberals," Dupont said. "And then it becomes an argument about who really believes the Bible. If Christianity is really about individual salvation, and the mission of the church is to win the lost, then [it is said that] these people who are telling us we need to get involved in the civil rights movement are just trying to lead us astray." The rejection of a "social gospel" remains popular among those conservative evangelicals today who see advocating for Black Lives Matter or immigrant rights as political activities. It is an argument with roots extending back to the theology of Thornwell and like-minded religion scholars of the 19th century. "What, then, is the Church?" Thornwell asked in his 1851 Report on Slavery. "It is not, as we fear too many regard it, a moral institute of universal good whose business it is to wage war upon every form of human ill, whether social, civil, political or moral." Such pronouncements have made Thornwell popular among "orthodox" Christian theologians who rebel against liberal interpretations of the church's mission in the modern world. Once his pronouncements on slavery and race are disregarded, Thornwell's theological views still resonate. One of the buildings on the grounds of his former church in South Carolina is Thornwell Hall. Until it closed due to concerns over the coronavirus, the building was used for children's education. The First Presbyterian ministerial staff has not been overly concerned that by honoring Thornwell, it may be offending potential African American members. "As far as I know, it has not kept people from our doors," said Gabe Fluhrer, an associate pastor at the church. Fluhrer has studied Thornwell's writings, many of which are highly sophisticated, and he is dismayed that the theologian's views on slavery and race have made it more difficult for people to appreciate his broader biblical insight. "If it were an impediment [to someone]," Fluhrer said, "I would love to speak to that person and say, 'Look, we need to condemn what is wrong with him, and we need to celebrate what is good.' He got a lot right on the Scriptures and everything wrong when it comes to race." Getting everything wrong with regard to race, however, can be an unforgivable failing for people whose life experience is shaped by racism. 'Jesus And John Wayne' Explores Christian Manhood — And How Belief Can Bolster Trump AUTHOR INTERVIEWS 'Jesus And John Wayne' Explores Christian Manhood — And How Belief Can Bolster Trump For many years, African American worshippers were relegated to the First Presbyterian balcony. Church authorities later permitted them to have a church a few blocks away where they could worship separately under the supervision of the First Presbyterian elders. It became known as Ladson Presbyterian Church, after one of the church's early pastors. The church has only a few dozen active members these days, but the congregation is close, and the Sunday services are intimate and joyful gatherings. There is no longer any connection to the original church. "I don't know anyone who goes to First Presbyterian," said Rosena Lucas, 88, a longtime Ladson member. "I've never had any interest [in attending]." Nor has Hemphill Pride, an elder in the Ladson congregation. "I see that church as a stranger, really," he said. For Pride and other Ladson members, the Thornwell connection still taints the parent church. "It's an affront to me," Pride said. "[To have] buildings named after people who interpreted the Bible in that manner is disrespectful to all Black people." Editor's note: In response to NPR's reporting, the elders of First Presbyterian Church voted on July 6 to remove the "Thornwell" name from their church buildings and lecture series.The Christian denomination in which I grew up was founded on the proposition that slavery could flourish alongside the gospel of Jesus Christ. Its founders believed that this arrangement was not just possible, but divinely mandated. Yet many white Christians, like myself, came of age in churches and communities where we seldom heard anything substantive or serious about the white-supremacist roots of our faith. I was raised in a Southern Baptist family, participated actively in my Southern Baptist church, and graduated from Mississippi College, a Southern Baptist institution. But it wasn’t until I was a 20-year-old seminary student that I began to grasp the central role that my denomination, and white Christians generally, have played in sustaining and legitimizing white supremacy. I knew that there had been a split between Northern and Southern Baptists, but the narrative was vague. Baptists in the South, I was taught, were caught in larger cultural and political fights that were rending the country in the mid-1800s. And—just as I had learned from my Mississippi public-school education—the true causes of the Civil War were “complicated.” Slavery was not the central issue but merely one of many North-South conflicts precipitating the split. As the prominent Baptist historian Walter “Buddy” Shurden has pointed out, it wasn’t until the last quarter of the 20th century that white Baptist historians confronted the denomination’s pro-slavery, white-supremacist origins. [ Andrew Ferguson: Trump’s Attempt at an Un-Trumpian Image ] The Baptist denominational history is not unique in American Christianity. Virtually all of the major white mainline Protestant denominations split over the issue of slavery. For example, Northern and Southern Methodists parted ways in 1845, the same year as the Baptists, producing an additional spark for the tinderbox of Southern political secession. While they disagreed about slavery, both Southern and Northern Methodists agreed that Black Methodists should hold a subservient place not just in society but also in Christian fellowship. When the branches reunited in 1939, they segregated Black congregations into a deceptively named “Central Jurisdiction,” thereby limiting their influence in the denomination for three decades, until this system was finally abolished in 1968. And while the national United Methodist Church publicly supported the civil-rights movement, most white Methodists in the pews rejected or simply ignored national denominational directives and actions. In the South, white Methodists and other mainline Protestants were hardly distinguishable from white Baptists in their support of a white-supremacist social order during the civil-rights era. [Related: Southern Baptists and the Sin of Racism ] The history of white supremacy among white Catholics is more complex, but the connection to white supremacy is equally clear. With its roots in Western Europe, Roman Catholicism has a long history of colonialism, particularly in Africa and the global South, where centuries of atrocities against Black and brown peoples were justified by the conviction that white Christians were God’s chosen means of “civilizing” the world. In the United States, Catholics and Catholic institutions were prominent slaveholders in the 18th and 19th centuries and forced enslaved people to convert to the religion. In late-18th-century Maryland, for example, one-fifth of Catholics were enslaved people owned by white Catholics or white Catholic institutions. This post was adapted from Jones’s recent book. Given this pervasive history, it is well past time for white Christians to reckon with the racism of our past and the willful amnesia of our present. For most white Christians, this journey will be challenging because, as I have found, it is deeply personal. My 1815 family Bible gives witness to ancestors from middle Georgia who were Baptist preachers, slave owners, and Confederate soldiers. My family moved from Virginia to Georgia after receiving land grants as a reward for military service in the Revolutionary War. This occurred while the government was forcibly removing Native Americans from Georgia and supporting the growth of white settlements. Underneath the glossy, self-congratulatory histories that white Christian churches have written about themselves—which typically depict white Christians as exemplars of democratic principles and pillars of the community—is a thinly veiled, deeply troubling past. White Christian churches have not just been complacent or complicit in failing to address racism; rather, as the dominant cultural power in the U.S., they have been responsible for constructing and sustaining a project to protect white supremacy. Through the entire American story, white Christianity has served as the central source of moral legitimacy for a society explicitly built to value the lives of white people over Black people. And this legacy remains present and measurable in the cultural DNA of contemporary white Christianity, not only among evangelicals in the South but also among mainline Protestants in the Midwest and Catholics in the Northeast. In my day job, I am the CEO and founder of Public Religion Research Institute (PRRI), a nonprofit, nonpartisan organization that conducts research on issues at the intersection of religion, culture, and politics. I’m a social scientist by training and have always been fascinated by the ways in which beliefs, institutional belonging, and culture impact opinions and behaviors in public space. I strive to conduct research and write as an impartial observer. In our work at PRRI, we’ve found that white Christian groups—including evangelicals, mainline Protestants, and Catholics—consistently hold views that are at odds with African American Protestants’ views. The attitudes of nonreligious white Americans, conversely, tend to be more aligned with African Americans’. For white Americans, the data suggest that Christian identity limits their ability to see structural injustice, and even influences them to see themselves, rather than African Americans, as a persecuted group. RECOMMENDED READING A series of circuits and wires labeled with the letters of the alphabet Email Is Dangerous QUINN NORTON Eighteenth-century public square with pillory crowned by the Twitter logo and surrounded by a crowd The New Puritans ANNE APPLEBAUM The Fading Battlefields of World War I ALAN TAYLOR For example, attitudes about what the Confederacy symbolizes today are one of the most noticeable differentiators among these groups. Last year, in a national survey of more than 2,500 Americans, PRRI found that 86 percent of white evangelical Protestants, along with 70 percent of white mainline Protestants and 70 percent of white Catholics, believe that the Confederate flag is more a symbol of southern pride than of racism. By contrast, only 41 percent of white religiously unaffiliated Americans and 16 percent of African American Protestants agree; approximately six in 10 religiously unaffiliated white people and three-quarters of African American Protestants see the Confederate flag mostly as a racist symbol. Stephanie McCurry: The Confederacy was an antidemocratic, centralized state Similarly, nearly two-thirds (64 percent) of white Christians see the killings of African American men by police as isolated incidents rather than part of a broader pattern. There is some daylight here among white evangelicals (71 percent), white Catholics (63 percent), and white mainline Protestants (59 percent), but the differences are more a matter of degree than kind. And there is a 26-percentage-point gap between white Christians overall and religiously unaffiliated whites (38 percent agree they are isolated incidents) and a nearly 50-percentage-point gap between white Christians and African American Protestants (15 percent agree). These patterns—of nonreligious white people holding attitudes closer to African American Protestants’ than white Christians’ of all stripes—persist in question after question on issues of racial justice. In order to see this more clearly, I developed a Racism Index comprising 15 separate questions that cover four broad areas: attitudes about Confederate symbols; racial inequality and African American economic mobility; racial inequality and the treatment of African Americans in the criminal-justice system; and general perceptions of race and racism. Analysis of the composite Racism Index confirms the general pattern: White Christians are more likely than white religiously unaffiliated Americans to register higher scores. The median scores reveal similar attitudes among white Christian groups. Not surprisingly, given their history and strong presence in the former states of the Confederacy, white evangelical Protestants have the highest median score (0.78) on the Racism Index. But the median scores of white Catholics (0.72) and white mainline Protestants (0.69) are not far behind. These numbers stand out compared with the median scores of the general population (0.57), white religiously unaffiliated Americans (0.42), and Black Protestants (0.24). Even when employing more sophisticated statistical models that control for a range of demographic characteristics, holding more racist attitudes is independently predictive of identifying as a white Christian and vice versa. The results of these models lead us to some remarkable and damning conclusions: White Christians think of themselves as people who hold warm feelings toward African Americans, while simultaneously embracing a host of racist attitudes that are inconsistent with that assertion. Holding more racist views is a positive independent predictor of white Christian identity overall and for each of the three white Christian subgroups individually. By contrast, holding more racist views has only a very weak effect on white religiously unaffiliated identity, and that effect is in the negative direction. Attending church more frequently does not make white congregants less racist. On the contrary, there is a positive relationship between holding racist attitudes and white Christian identity among both frequent (weekly or more) and infrequent (seldom or never) church attenders. When we reverse the analysis to predict racist attitudes, being affiliated with each white Christian identity is independently associated with an approximately 10 percent increase in racist attitudes. By contrast, there is no significant relationship between white religiously unaffiliated identity and holding racist attitudes. Putting this in plain language, our models reveal that the more racist attitudes a person holds, the more likely he or she is to identify as a white Christian and vice versa. [ Read: The Evangelical Reckoning Over Donald Trump ] Today, 400 years after the first enslaved African landed on our shores, and more than 150 years after the abolition of slavery in America, a combination of social forces and demographic changes has brought the country to a crossroads. We white Christians must find the courage to face the fact that the version of Christianity that our ancestors built, “the faith of our fathers” as the hymn celebrates it, was a cultural force that, by design, protected and propagated white supremacy. We have inherited this tradition with scant critique, and we have a moral and religious obligation to face the burden of that history and its demand on our present. Inaction is a tacit blessing on white supremacy’s continued presence as a Christian habit and virtue. Doing nothing will ensure that, even despite our best conscious intentions, we will continue to be blind to the racial injustice all around us. Members of West Point Baptist Church pray during a service at Pleasant Valley Elementary School in Jacksonville, Ala. (Calla Kessler / The New York Times / Redux) White Christians must seek justice, rather than reconciliation, as the goal. Even when white Christians try to engage in this work, too many reach immediately for racial reconciliation, which they believe can be achieved through a straightforward transaction: white confession in exchange for Black forgiveness. For example, when the Southern Baptist Convention’s leaders issued a formal apology for defending slavery, opposing civil rights, and “condoning and/or perpetuating individual and systemic racism in our lifetime” at their national convention in 1995, they coupled it with a piece of contrived cultural theater that seemed to imply that a kind of magical reconciliation had instantaneously occurred. Reverend Gary Frost, a Black minister, rose to the podium to accept the apology and issued this brief declaration: "On behalf of my Black brothers and sisters, we accept your apology, and we extend to you our forgiveness in the name of our Lord and savior, Jesus Christ." The overwhelmingly white delegates erupted into applause. In less than 15 minutes, 150 years of Southern Baptist white supremacy was seemingly absolved. While some African Americans supported the apology, others were skeptical that it reflected meaningful change. This approach is really a strategy for making peace with the status quo, since it allows white Christians to move past the thornier issues of repair and restitution that real repentance requires. [ Read: The unofficial racism consultants to the white evangelical world ] If we are finally going to live into the fullness of the promise of liberty and justice for all Americans, we will have to recover from our white-supremacy-induced amnesia. Confronting historical atrocities is indeed difficult, and at times overwhelming. But if we want to root out an insidious white supremacy from our institutions, our religion, and our psyches, we will have to move beyond forgetfulness and silence. Importantly, as white Americans find the courage to embark on this journey of transformation, we will discover that the beneficiaries are not only our country and our fellow nonwhite and non-Christian Americans, but also ourselves. We will understand that this project is not an altruistic one, but rather a desperate life-and-death struggle for our own future. [ Peter Wehner: The deepening crisis in evangelical Christianity ] As James Baldwin provocatively said in a speech nearly 50 years ago, the genesis of the civil-rights movement was when an oppressed and despised people began to wake up collectively to what had happened to them. The question today is whether we white Christians will also awaken to see what has happened to us, and grasp once and for all how white supremacy has robbed us of our own heritage and of our ability to be in right relationships with our fellow citizens, with ourselves, and even with God. We have to accept, given the way in which white supremacy has burrowed into our Christian identity, that refusing to address this sinister disorder in our faith will continue to generate serious negative consequences not just for our fellow Americans but also for ourselves and our children. Reckoning with white supremacy, for us, is now an unavoidable moral choiceBy Dan Avery Veronica Bonifacio Penales, a sophomore at Baylor University, a Baptist college in Waco, Texas, said she can be out as queer on campus, but that doesn’t mean she feels supported. Students cannot face disciplinary action or lose financial aid for identifying as LGBTQ, according to the Baylor website, but Penales, 20, said she’s faced harassment, including Post-it notes with homophobic messages placed on her dorm room door. “They say they have preventive measures in place but nothing gets done,” she said of Baylor’s policies to protect LGBTQ students. “When I reported discrimination, I was referred to the counseling center.” Baylor spokesperson Lori Fogleman told NBC News she couldn’t address the specific incident Penales cited but said students who face harassment can report it to the Title IX Office, the Bias Response Team, or if they are in immediate danger, the Baylor University Police. Penales said she reported harassment to the Title IX Office, which recommended she talk to a counselor. “Baylor is committed to providing a loving and caring community for all students — including our LGBTQ students — because it is part and parcel of our University’s mission that calls us to educate our students within a caring community,” Fogleman said. The alleged harassment Penales faced isn’t unique. LGBTQ students at Christian colleges face more bullying and harassment and are far more likely to experience isolation, depression and harm than their straight classmates, according to a new survey commissioned by the Religious Exemption Accountability Project, or REAP, an organization that advocates for LGBTQ students at taxpayer-funded religious colleges and universities. Gender-nonconforming students are particularly at risk, the researchers found: Twenty-two percent reported bullying or harassment, compared to 5 percent of cisgender students. Fourteen percent reported being sexually assaulted, compared to 2 percent of their cisgender peers. In all, queer students were three times more likely to report depression and anxiety and three times more likely to have seriously considered suicide, according to the report. More than 1 in 10 (12 percent) also reported that their school suggested they receive counseling, suggested or mandated that they undergo “conversion therapy,” revoked their financial aid or scholarships or took other actions against them as a result of their sexual orientation or gender identity. The research was based on a survey of 3,000 full-time students at 134 taxpayer-funded Christian colleges and universities, conducted by the survey company College Pulse between Jan. 28 and Feb. 6. “The question we’re always asked is, ‘Why would an LGBTQ student go to a Christian college?’” REAP Director Paul Southwick said. “I feel like that’s kind of gaslighting, because the assumption is they don’t belong there.”There will always be queer students at Christian colleges, he said, “because there have always been young queer people in those Christian communities.” “When you have a fundamentalist Christian parent, they tend to want to send their kids to a Christan college,” said Southwick, 37, a lawyer with Paul Southwick LLC. “And they see their father went there or their sisters went there, they’ve been offered a scholarship. There’s a legacy with that school.” Twelve percent of students in the survey identified as nonheterosexuals and 2 percent as a gender minority — either nonbinary, genderqueer, agender, transgender or noncisgender. While that’s less than the nearly 16 percent of 18-23 year olds who consider themselves something other than heterosexual, according to a Gallup Poll last month, nearly one-fifth of LGBTQ students on Christian campuses are closeted, the REAP report found. (Some 19 percent indicated in the report that they hadn't told anyone at school about their orientation or identity.) Many Christian schools, while private, still receive federal funding in the form of grants and student financial aid, Southwick said. During the Obama administration, LGBTQ anti-discrimination protections in education were greatly expanded under Title IX of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. But private colleges receiving federal funding could still claim an exemption on religious grounds. “Ideally such discrimination wouldn’t be tolerated in the culture, but right now we don’t live in a perfect world,” said Shane Windmeyer, co-founder of Campus Pride, a national organization for LGBTQ student leaders and campus organizations. Under the Trump administration, he said, “schools were told, ‘Don’t worry, you don’t have to claim an exemption — your religious rights trump everything.’” On Jan. 8, less than two weeks before President Joe Biden took office, the Department of Education published a memorandum indicating that LGBTQ students were not expressly covered under Title IX protections. Biden has asked Secretary of Education Miguel Cardona to review policies Betsy DeVos, the education secretary in the Trump administration, put in place regarding Title IX, but it’s not clear if that includes religious exemptions. Get the Morning Rundown Get a head start on the morning's top stories. Enter your email SIGN UP THIS SITE IS PROTECTED BY RECAPTCHA PRIVACY POLICY | TERMS OF SERVICE According to REAP, one-third of the more than 2,000 four-year undergraduate institutions in the United States are religiously affiliated, including more than 200 Christian colleges with policies that explicitly discriminate against LGBTQ students. Often, those policies come in the form of student codes of conduct that prohibit same-sex relationships and LGBTQ advocacy. Many also prohibit gender-nonconforming behavior, Southwick said, such as dressing in a way that does not align with one’s birth sex or using a different name. Recommended OUT COMMUNITY VOICES Meet the gamer who raised $400K for transgender rights in Texas WORLD CUP Rainbow flags may be confiscated to 'protect' World Cup fans, Qatar official says Even something as simple as holding hands or wearing makeup can be grounds for a violation. “A lot of 17-year-olds don’t have the agency to choose their school,” he said. “And even if they do, many are committed to their faith — maybe they hope they’ll be ‘cured.’” He was one of those students himself: In 2005, Southwick graduated from George Fox University, a private Quaker school outside Portland, Oregon. “I did what a lot of these kids do — I struggled with my ‘same-sex attraction,’” he said. “It got so bad I had to be hospitalized. My campus pastor told me my problem was with the devil and we decided together that I should go to conversion therapy.” George Fox University declined to comment, but shared a statement by Mark Yarhouse, a professor of psychology at Wheaton College in Illinois. Yarhouse criticized the REAP study and alleged Southwick had a conflict of interest in pursuing it because he is representing a client who claims the Fuller Theological Seminary discriminated against her for being a lesbian. A federal judge ruled in favor of the seminary in October, but Southwick appealed the case to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 9th Circuit. George Fox University’s Community Lifestyle Statement indicates “that only marriage between a man and a woman is God's intention for the joyful fulfillment of sexual intimacy … [and] sexual behaviors outside of this context are inconsistent with God's teaching.” Despite his experience, Southwick says the goal isn’t to shut down schools like his alma mater. “They serve an important function,” he said. “The aim is to apply pressure, from within and without, to get them to change.” Sexual orientation and gender identity should also be added to any anti-bullying or anti-discrimination policies, Southwick said, and schools should cease punishing LGBTQ identities within their student codes of conduct. “If straight students can date, queer students should be allowed to,” Southwick said. “If straight students can get married and live together, so should gay couples.” In recent years, many Christian colleges have struck a more conciliatory tone, updating their codes of conduct and speaking with LGBTQ students directly. But critics say they’ve only softened their rhetoric, not their treatment. One Liberty University student told researchers they would feel “physically unsafe” if their orientation became public knowledge, according to the report. “I have overheard people saying, "hang the f--s and let them burn,” the student said, according to the report. “…There have been multiple classes that have entire units condemning anyone not cisgender and straight.” Liberty University did not respond to NBC News’ request for comment. Most Christians schools are not so overt, Windmeyer said. “Colleges today want to be seen as LGBT-friendly,” he said. “There are only a handful of Christian colleges who don’t care. Most just want to cloud this issue and come off as supportive because they know it’ll impact recruitment and admissions.” At a minimum, Southwick wants LGBTQ student clubs to be treated like any other campus group, with access to funding and space on campus. Baylor’s statement on human sexuality doesn’t address socializing, but affirms “Baylor students will not participate in advocacy groups which promote understandings of sexuality that are contrary to biblical teaching.”Baylor’s unofficial LGBTQ student group, Gamma Alpha Upsilon, is recognized by students and some faculty but is not officially sanctioned by the administration, making it ineligible for funding or space on campus. A measure supporting a charter for the group passed both the student and faculty senates but the Division of Student Life has not indicated a time frame in which it will render a decision. “It’s been a 10-plus-year fight for LGBTQ rights on this campus,” Penales said. “They’ve made a lot of strides but it’s hard when you know your school’s mission doesn’t protect you. They talk a big game when it comes to ‘Love thy neighbor,’ but they don’t really follow through on it, especially when it comes to the LGBTQ community.”On October 6, 1998, Matthew Shepard was beaten, tortured, and left to die in the state of Wyoming, USA. He was gay and it was a hate crime. Christians are rightly concerned when anyone, no matter who and what they are, is treated in this way. Matthew’s family received wonderful help from the local Roman Catholic Priest as they sought to come to terms with this terrible event, but are Christians really innocent of crimes like this? If we go to history the answer is no. Countless people accused of the ‘sin of sodomy’ have been brutally tortured, their genitals publically cut off, and burned alive at Christian instigation. In Protestant Geneva people were tied to a large wagon wheel and then systematically beaten with clubs until each bone in their body broke and they died. In the 18th century, Dutch authorities, in a frenzy of hatred and under the instigation of Protestant ministers, held teenage young men under water until they drowned, and executed boys as young as 16 by hanging. Today, we know for sure that LGBTQI youth who are connected to Christian institutions that do not support their orientation are at a much higher risk of suicide. In addition, they are also at a very high risk of mental health challenges including substance abuse, and social troubles such as homelessness. Why? Because, if you face racism, the one place you might still be safe is your family; but if you are LGBTQI and Christian your family might actually reject you and you might experience religious bullying. Much of this behaviour is ignored and sometimes even encouraged by many Christian churches. On what basis do they believe that Christians have a right to do things that profoundly harm others to the point of suicide? The argument taught by a majority of Christian churches is that ‘homosexuality is a sin.’ Therefore, rejection and judgmental behaviour is simply a form of ‘tough love.’ People are shunned and excluded ‘for their own good.’ Really? Is this how Christians understand love and grace? Has God appointed them to be judge and jury? Do they really know what they are talking about when they appeal to the ‘long Christian tradition’ of ‘rejecting homosexuality? The answer to that question is no. Most Christians claim to know this tradition, but their knowledge is quite superficial. First of all, the Bible does not condemn homosexuality. Yes, this is a technical point, but a very important one. Modern translations of the Bible that use the word ‘homosexual’ are simply wrong. The Bible describes sexual behaviours that are unacceptable, but none of these clearly match or perfectly fit the modern concept ‘homosexual.’ What then of sodomy? Granted that the church has overreacted to sodomy in the past, but does the Bible clearly say that it is wrong? Again, the answer is no. The concept of sodomy - based in the story of the judgement and destruction of the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah told in Genesis 19 - does not occur in the original text of the Bible. Sodomy is an invention of the church which slowly developed in early Christianity, and it became a Christian term only by the fourth century AD. Over time ‘sodomy’ took on many forms of meaning. The Bible itself does not associate the story of Sodom and Gomorrah with same sex relationships. In the Old Testament other references speak of ‘idolatry’ (as in Deuteronomy 29), ‘injustice’ (as in the oppression of widows and orphans referred to in Isaiah 1), and ‘inhospitality,’ which Jesus associated with the city of Sodom in Matthew 10:14-15. There is also a reference in the book of Jude, one of the smaller books at the end of the Bible, which likely refers to an ancient belief that angels sinned by having sexual relations with women. The beginnings of the idea of sodomy were deeply influenced by Roman cultural conceptions of what a ‘true man’ should be like. For much of Christian history, the term described various sexual ‘deviances,’ most of which were heterosexual. Medieval theologians were obsessed with the ‘correct’ use of human genitals, and believed that sex without the potential to create children was wrong. Any Christian man today who has had a vasectomy and still has sexual relations with his wife is guilty of these definitions of sodomy. Without becoming too graphic, let me just say that many readers of this article who are in loving, committed, heterosexual marriages are probably committing some form of sodomy under the old traditions of the church. Even so, you might ask, should we quibble about words? Surely the bible is against all forms of same-sex sexual relationships? Doesn’t the biblical book of Leviticus clearly say that “a man shall not lie with a man as with a woman” in chapter 18:22? Well, yes and no. The original Hebrew does not quite say that. It says something like, “man… shall… not lie… man… beds… wives.” Conservative Jewish rabbis have pointed out that in its proper context, this text has to do with the responsibilities of a married man to his wives in the old Hebrew kinship system of the time. Some of these authorities, like the renowned Old Testament scholar Jacob Milgrom in his famous commentary on this text in the Anchor Bible Commentary, argue that it is about protecting the right of a wife to have children by her husband. Therefore, Milgrom argues, it is simply wrong to apply the two texts in Leviticus to same sex relationships where a man is not married to a woman. Yes, it is true that by the fourth century AD, Christians started reading this text - as well as Leviticus 20:13 - as having implications beyond heterosexual marriage relationships, but from the point of view of Jewish law, this is not really the way the text should be understood. Suffice it to say that the ‘traditional’ Christian interpretation of this text - which is often considered to be beyond question - is not necessarily biblically correct, because it pulls these texts out of their legal and historical context. Other texts that are often rolled out to condemn and reject LGBTQI people to the point of harm include Romans 1, and lists of sins that are interpreted to cover all forms of same sex relationships such as 1 Corinthians 6:9 and 1 Timothy 1:10. The problem is that in all these cases there is uncertainty about the translation of the original Greek, along with questions about the historical context and how these texts functioned in those contexts. Romans 1, for example, uses some strong language that suggests a memory of the wicked sexual exploitation of Emperor Gaius Caligula in Rome, and is part of a rhetorical argument in which the author wants to implicate all people, particularly those who sit in judgment over others, in bad behaviour. In 1 Corinthians 6:9 the original Greek word is literally “man-bed” and likely refers to prostitution, while in 1 Timothy 1:10 the same Greek word is used. It appears that the translators had a preconceived idea of meaning in their translations. Older translations render a somewhat unclear but more literal translation as in “abusers of themselves with mankind.” Given these problems of time, context, history, mistranslation and misinterpretation, can Christians honestly find it acceptable to behave in ways that harm LGBTQI people by reference to texts whose meaning is fundamentally ambiguous? Of course, questioning the basis of the church’s hostility to same sex relationships does not mean that all forms of sexual expression are morally ok in Christian terms. Christian teachings contain profound and loving guidelines for sexual ethics including love, justice, respect and responsibility. Most of all they include not doing harm to others through your behaviour. Being committed, making that commitment public in community, loving your beloved, and being faithful to that person are all things that Christians encourage and support as the right way to express their sexuality. Harming others and denigrating the love they experience for another human being, not so much.Criticism of religion involves criticism of the validity, concept, or ideas of religion.[1] Historical records of criticism of religion go back to at least 5th century BCE in ancient Greece, in Athens specifically, with Diagoras "the Atheist" of Melos. In ancient Rome, an early known example is Lucretius' De rerum natura from the 1st century BCE. Every exclusive religion on Earth (as well as every exclusive world view) that promotes exclusive truth-claims necessarily denigrates the truth-claims of other religions.[2] Thus, some criticisms of religion become criticisms of one or more aspects of a specific religious tradition. Critics of religion in general may portray religion as one or more of: outdated, harmful to the individual, harmful to society, an impediment to the progress of science, a source of immoral acts or customs, a political tool for social control. Contents 1 Definition of religion 2 History of criticism 3 Origin and function of religion 3.1 Social construct 3.2 Narratives to provide comfort and meaning 3.2.1 Opium of the people 3.3 Viruses of the mind 3.3.1 Response to the viruses of the mind criticism 3.4 Mental illness or delusion 3.5 Immature stage of societal development 3.6 Response to criticism 4 Criticism of religious concepts 5 Arguments which state that religion is harmful to individuals 5.1 Inadequate medical care 5.2 Jerusalem syndrome 5.3 Honor killings and stoning 5.4 Genital modification and mutilation 5.5 Counterarguments to arguments which state that religion is harmful to individuals 6 Arguments which state that religion is harmful to society 6.1 Holy war and religious terrorism 6.2 Suppression of scientific progress 6.3 Arguments against the belief that religion is harmful to society 7 Morality 7.1 Children 7.2 Homosexuals 7.3 Racism 7.4 Women 7.4.1 Islam 7.4.2 Christianity 7.5 Animals 7.6 Response to criticism of morality 8 Corrupt purposes of leaders 8.1 Dominionism 8.1.1 Response to criticism of dominionism 9 Notable critics of religion 10 See also 10.1 Criticism of specific religions and worldviews 11 Notes 12 References 13 Further reading 14 External links Definition of religion Main articles: Definition of religion and Religion Religion is a modern Western concept that developed from the 17th century onwards, not before.[3][4][5][6][7] For example, in Asia, no one before the 19th century self-identified as a "Hindu" or other similar identities.[3][8] The ancient and medieval cultures that produced religious texts, like the Hebrew Bible, New Testament or the Quran, did not have such a conception or idea in their languages, cultures, or histories and neither did the peoples in the Americas before Columbus.[9][3][6] Today, even though modern researchers conceive religion broadly as an abstraction which entails beliefs, doctrines and sacred places, there is still no scholarly consensus over what a religion is.[10][11][3][12] History of criticism In his work De rerum natura, the 1st-century BCE Roman poet Titus Lucretius Carus wrote: "But 'tis that same religion oftener far / Hath bred the foul impieties of men".[13] A philosopher of the Epicurean school, Lucretius believed the world was composed solely of matter and void and that all phenomena could be understood as resulting from purely natural causes. Despite believing in gods, Lucretius, like Epicurus, felt that religion was born of fear and ignorance, and that understanding the natural world would free people of its shackles.[14][15] He was not against religion in and of itself, but against traditional religion which he saw as superstition for teaching that gods interfered with the world.[16] During the Islamic Golden Age, philosopher Al-Ma'arri criticized all prophets' statements as fabrications, and branded God in Islam a hypocrite for forbidding murder but sending angels to take each man's life.[17] At the beginning of the 16th century, Niccolò Machiavelli said: "We Italians are irreligious and corrupt above others... because the church and her representatives have set us the worst example".[18] To Machiavelli, religion was merely a tool, useful for a ruler wishing to manipulate public opinion.[19] In the 18th century, the French Enlightenment philosopher Voltaire was a Deist and strongly critical of religious intolerance. Voltaire complained about Jews killed by other Jews for worshiping a golden calf and similar actions; he also condemned how Christians killed other Christians over religious differences and how Christians killed Native Americans for not being baptised. Voltaire claimed the real reason for these killings was that Christians wanted to plunder the wealth of those killed. Voltaire was also critical of Muslim intolerance towards other religions.[20] Also in the 18th century, the Scottish Enlightenment philosopher David Hume criticised the teleological arguments for religion. Hume claimed that natural explanations for the order in the universe were reasonable. An important aim of Hume's writings was demonstrating the unsoundness of the philosophical basis for religion.[21] The 18th-century American Enlightenment political philosopher and religious skeptic Thomas Paine is especially noteworthy both for his contributions to the cause of the American Revolution and his writings in defense of Deism alongside the criticism of Abrahamic religions.[22] In The Age of Reason (1793–1794) and other writings he advocated Deism, promoted reason and freethought, and argued against institutionalized religions in general and the Christian doctrine in particular.[22] Christopher Hitchens, journalist and author of God is not Great In the early 21st century, the New Atheists became focal polemicists in modern criticism of religion.[23][24] The four authors come from widely different backgrounds and have published books which have been the focus of criticism of religion narratives, with over 100 books and hundreds of scholarly articles commenting on and critiquing the "Four Horsemen's" works. Their books and articles have spawned debate in multiple fields of inquiry and are heavily quoted in popular media (online forums, YouTube, television and popular philosophy). In The End of Faith, philosopher Sam Harris focuses on violence among other toxic qualities of religion. In Breaking the Spell, philosopher Daniel Dennett focuses on the question of "why we believe strange things". In The God Delusion, biologist Richard Dawkins covers almost every facet of religion, injecting both snarky irony and humor. In God Is Not Great, journalist and polemicist Christopher Hitchens focused on how religious forces attack human dignity and on the corruption of religious organizations. In the Oxford Handbook of Atheism, according to Thomas Zenc the four books were published during a time of intense debate on political, religious and sociological questions. The works share many common themes yet notably differ in scope, style and content. According to Zenc, while the beginnings of a broader narrative (New Atheism) seems to have emerged, it does not stand up to the full definition of a movement.[25] Origin and function of religion Main articles: Theories of religions and Development of religion Social construct Dennett and Harris have asserted that theist religions and their scriptures are not divinely inspired, but man made to fulfill social, biological and political needs.[26][page needed][27][page needed] Dawkins balances the benefits of religious beliefs (mental solace, community building and promotion of virtuous behavior) against the drawbacks.[28] Such criticisms treat religion as a social construct[29] and thus just another human ideology. Narratives to provide comfort and meaning David Hume argued that religion developed as a source of comfort in the face of adversity, not as an honest grappling with verifiable truth. Religion is therefore an unsophisticated form of reasoning.[30] Daniel Dennett has argued that, with the exception of more modern religions such as Raëlism, Mormonism, Scientology and the Baháʼí Faith, most religions were formulated at a time when the origin of life, the workings of the body, and the nature of the stars and planets were poorly understood.[31] These narratives were intended to give solace and a sense of relationship with larger forces. As such, they may have served several important functions in ancient societies. Examples include the views many religions traditionally had towards solar and lunar eclipses and the appearance of comets (forms of astrology).[32][33] Given current understanding of the physical world, where human knowledge has increased dramatically, Dawkins and French atheist philosopher Michel Onfray contend that continuing to hold on to these belief systems is irrational and no longer useful.[28][34] Opium of the people Karl Marx Religious suffering is, at the same time, the expression of real suffering and a protest against real suffering. Religion is the sigh of the oppressed creature, the heart of a heartless world, and the soul of soulless conditions. It is the opium of the people. — Karl Marx[35] According to Karl Marx, the father of "scientific socialism", religion is a tool used by the ruling classes whereby the masses can shortly relieve their suffering via the act of experiencing religious emotions. It is in the interest of the ruling classes to instill in the masses the religious conviction that their current suffering will lead to eventual happiness. Therefore, as long as the public believes in religion, they will not attempt to make any genuine effort to understand and overcome the real source of their suffering, which in Marx's opinion was their capitalist economic system. In this perspective, Marx saw religion as escapism.[35] Marx also viewed the Christian doctrine of original sin as being deeply anti-social in character. Original sin, he argued, convinces people that the source of their misery lies in the inherent and unchangeable "sinfulness" of humanity rather than in the forms of social organization and institutions, which Marx argued can be changed through the application of collective social planning.[36] Viruses of the mind Richard Dawkins, author of The God Delusion In his 1976 book The Selfish Gene, Richard Dawkins coined the term memes to describe informational units that can be transmitted culturally, analogous to genes.[37] He later used this concept in the essay "Viruses of the Mind" to explain the persistence of religious ideas in human culture.[38] Response to the viruses of the mind criticism Religious and non-religious people are both critical of Dawkin's meme theory.[citation needed] Some have criticized the idea that "God" and "Faith" are viruses of the mind, suggesting that it is far removed from evidence and data" that it is unreasonable to extract certain behaviours solely through religious memes.[39] Alister McGrath has responded by arguing that "memes have no place in serious scientific reflection",[40] or that religious ideas function the way Dawkins claims.[41] Mental illness or delusion See also: Neuroscience of religion, Psychology of religion § Religion and mental illness, and Religion and schizophrenia Sam Harris compares religion to a mental illness, saying that it "allows otherwise normal human beings to reap the fruits of madness and consider them holy".[42] According to a retrospective study of Abraham, Moses, Jesus Christ, and the Apostle Paul, they may have had psychotic disorders that contributed inspirations for their revelations. They conclude that people with such disorders have had a monumental influence on civilization.[43] Psychological studies into the phenomenon of mysticism link disturbing aspects of certain mystics' experiences to childhood abuse.[44][45][46] Clifford A. Pickover found evidence which suggests that temporal lobe epilepsy may be linked to a variety of so-called spiritual or "other worldly" experiences, such as spiritual possessions, which occur as the result of altered electrical activity in the brain.[47] Carl Sagan, in his last book The Demon-Haunted World: Science as a Candle in the Dark, presented his belief that the miraculous sightings of religious figures and modern sightings of UFOs were all caused by the same mental disorder. Vilayanur S. Ramachandran suggests "It's possible that many great religious leaders had temporal lobe seizures and this predisposes them to having visions, having mystical experiences".[48] Michael Persinger artificially stimulated the temporal lobes of the brain with a magnetic field by using a device which he nicknamed the "God helmet" and he was able to artificially induce religious experiences along with near-death experiences and ghost sightings.[49] According to John Bradshaw "Some forms of temporal lobe tumours or epilepsy are associated with extreme religiosity." In his research recent brain imaging of religious subjects praying or meditating show identical activity in the respective human section of the brain which Ramachandran calls God-spots. Psilocybin from mushrooms affect regions of the brain including the serotonergic system, which generating a sense of strong religious meaning, unity and ecstasy. Certain physical rituals may generate similar feelings.[50] In his book Why People Believe Weird Things, Michael Shermer theorizes that emerging mankind imposed made-up explanations and bizarre rituals for natural phenomena which they did not and could not understand. This theory is similar to the arguments which Daniel Dennett wrote in Breaking the Spell[51] however, Shermer's argument goes further by stating that the peculiar and at times the frightening rituals of religion are but one of many forms of strange customs that survive to this day.[52] Immature stage of societal development Philosophy and Christian Art, W. Ridgway, 1878 Philosopher Auguste Comte posited that many societal constructs pass through three stages and that religion corresponds to the two earlier, or more primitive stages by stating: "From the study of the development of human intelligence, in all directions, and through all times, the discovery arises of a great fundamental law, to which it is necessarily subjective, and which has a solid foundation of proof, both in the facts of our organization and in our historical experience. The law is this: that each of our leading conceptions – each branch of our knowledge – passes successively through three different theoretical conditions: the theological, or fictitious; the metaphysical, or abstract; and the scientific, or positive".[53] Response to criticism In his book Is Religion Dangerous?, Keith Ward notes that not all false opinions are delusions and that belief in God is different as many great minds and people who live ordinary lives and believe in God are not irrational people.[54] Hyperreligiosity or even "intensely professed atheism" can emerge from emotional disturbances involving temporal lobe epilepsy.[55] Criticism of religious concepts See also: Faith and rationality A sign by the Connecticut Valley Atheists in Rockville's Central Park, Vernon in December 2007, that criticizes religion and draws attention to the September 11 attacks, with the group issuing an explanatory press release: "Clearly, 9/11 is the work of fanatics. However, we feel that religion even in moderation provides a foundation for fanatical groups to thrive"[56] Some criticisms of religions have been: Religion is wrong as it is in conflict with science (i.e. Genesis creation myth,[57] Hindu creationism[58]) Revelations conflict internally (i.e. discrepancies in the Bible among the four Gospels of the New Testament)[59][60][61] Arguments which state that religion is harmful to individuals Some have criticized the effects of the adherence to dangerous practices such as self-denial and altruistic suicide.[62] Inadequate medical care Saint Francis Borgia performing an exorcism, Francisco Goya See also: Exorcism and Faith healing A detailed study in 1998 found 140 instances of deaths of children due to religion-based medical neglect. Most of these cases involved Christian parents who withheld medical care and relied on prayer to cure the child's disease.[63] Jerusalem syndrome Main article: Jerusalem syndrome Jerusalem has loaned its name to a unique psychological phenomenon where Jewish or Christian individuals who develop obsessive religious themed ideas or delusions (sometimes believing themselves to be Jesus Christ or another prophet) will feel compelled to travel to Jerusalem.[64][65] During a period of 13 years (1980–1993) for which admissions to the Kfar Shaul Mental Health Centre in Jerusalem were analyzed, it was reported[66] that 1,200 tourists with severe, Jerusalem-themed mental problems, were referred to this clinic. Of these, 470 were admitted to hospital. On average, 100 such tourists have been seen annually, 40 of them requiring admission to hospital. About 2 million tourists visit Jerusalem each year. Kalian and Witztum note that as a proportion of the total numbers of tourists visiting the city, this is not significantly different from any other city.[67][68] The statements of these claims has however been disputed, with the arguments that experiencers of the Jerusalem syndrome already were mentally ill.[67][69] Honor killings and stoning Main articles: Honor killings and stoning Once well known in Western countries, honor killings are now an extremely rare occurrence, however, they still occur in other parts of the world. An honor killing occurs when a person is killed by their family for bringing dishonor or shame upon it.[70] Stoning is a form of capital punishment in which a group batters a person with thrown stones until the person dies. As of September 2010, stoning is a punishment that is included in the laws of some countries, including Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Yemen, the United Arab Emirates, and some states in Nigeria[71] as punishment for zina al-mohsena ("adultery of married persons").[72] While stoning may not be codified in the laws of Afghanistan and Somalia, both countries have seen several incidents of stoning to death.[73][74] Until the early 2000s, stoning was a legal form of capital punishment in Iran. In 2002, the Iranian judiciary officially placed a moratorium on stoning.[75] In 2005, judiciary spokesman Jamal Karimirad stated that "in the Islamic republic, we do not see such punishments being carried out", further adding that if stoning sentences were passed by lower courts, they were overruled by higher courts and "no such verdicts have been carried out".[76] In 2008, the judiciary decided to fully scrap the punishment from the books in legislation submitted to parliament for approval.[77] In early 2013, Iranian parliament published official report about excluding stoning from penal code and it accused Western media for spreading "noisy propaganda" about the case.[78] Genital modification and mutilation Main article: Circumcision Further information: Circumcision controversies, Female genital mutilation § Religion, and Religious male circumcision According to the World Health Organization, female genital mutilation has no health benefits and is a violation of basic human rights. Though no first tier religious texts prescribe the practice, some practitioners do believe there is religious support for it. While it is mostly found in Muslim countries, it is also practiced by some Christian and Animist countries mostly in Africa. GFA is not widely practiced in some Muslim countries making it difficult to separate religion from culture. Some religious leaders promote it, some consider it irrelevant to religion, and others contribute to its elimination". The practice is illegal in all Western countries and it is also illegal to transport a girl to another country to carry out FGM. Multiple parents have been charged for committing this crime in the United Kingdom, with those charged being exclusively from Muslim countries.[79] The Jewish Bible, the New Testament, and the Quran themselves do not contain textual support for the practice of female genital mutilation even though the practice predates both Islam and Christianity.[80] Male circumcision is required in Judaism, optional in Islam, and not required in Christianity. Globally, male circumcision is done for religious, social, and health promotion reasons.[81][82] Male circumcision is a painful process and can lead to bleeding and in some cases severe side effects including penile dysfunction and even death.[83] Counterarguments to arguments which state that religion is harmful to individuals A metareview of 850 research papers on Religion in the United States concluded that "the majority of well-conducted studies found that higher levels of religious involvement are positively associated with indicators of psychological well-being (life satisfaction, happiness, positive affect, and higher morale) and with less depression, suicidal thoughts and behavior, drug/alcohol use/abuse".[84][85] A metareview of 147 studies[86] states that religiousness is mildly associated with fewer depression symptoms and that life events can still increase depressive symptoms. In a metareview of 498 studies states that religious involvement in general is associated with:less depression, lower drug and alcohol abuse, less promiscuous sexual behaviors, reduced likelihood of suicide, lower rates of delinquency and crime, educational attainment and purpose or meaning in life.[87] A meta analysis of 34 studies states that a positive relationship still emerges between religion and mental health even when using different conceptualizations of religiosity and mental health used in different studies.[88] According to Robert Putnam, membership of religious groups in the United States was positively correlated with membership of voluntary organizations, higher level of commitment, better self-esteem, lower risk of suicide, higher life satisfaction.[89] According to Pew Research Center's 2019 global study, when comparing religious people to those who have less or no religion, actively religious people are more likely to describe themselves as "very happy", join other mundane organizations like charities or clubs, vote, and at the same time were less likely to smoke and drink. However, there was no correlation between religiosity and self perception of better health.[90] An investigation on subjective well-being representing 90% of the world population has noted that, globally, religious people are usually happier than nonreligious people, though nonreligious people also reach high levels of happiness.[91] As of 2001, much of research on religion and health has been conducted within the United States.[92] According to one study, there was no significant correlation between religiosity and individual happiness in Denmark and the Netherlands, countries that have lower rates of religion, lower discrimination against atheists and where both the religious and non-religious are normative.[93] Despite honor killings occurring in multiple cultures and religions, Islam is frequently blamed for their institution and persistence. Professor Tahira Shaid Khan notes that there is nothing in the Qur'an that permits or sanctions honor killings,[94] and attributes it to broader attitudes that view women as property with no rights as the explanation for honor killings.[94] Khan also argues that this view results in violence against women and their being turned "into a commodity which can be exchanged, bought and sold".[95] Arguments which state that religion is harmful to society Some aspects of religion are criticized on the basis that they damage society as a whole. For example, Steven Weinberg states that it takes religion to make good people do evil.[96] Bertrand Russell and Richard Dawkins cite religiously inspired or justified violence, resistance to social change, attacks on science, repression of women and homophobia.[97] John Hartung has claimed that major religious moral codes can lead to "us vs. them" group solidarity and a mentality which can lead people to dehumanise or demonise individuals who are outside their group by portraying them as individuals who are either less worthy or "not fully human". The results of this attitude can vary from mild discrimination to outright genocide.[98] A poll by The Guardian noted that 82% of the British people believe that religion is socially divisive and that this effect is harmful despite the observation that non-believers outnumber believers two to one.[99] According to one study, membership in a religious group can accentuate biases in behavior towards in group versus out group members, which may explain the lower number of interracial friends and the greater approval of torture among church members.[100] Holy war and religious terrorism Entry of the Crusaders into Constantinople by Gustave Doré (1832–1883) Main articles: Religious war, Religious terrorism, and Religious violence While terrorism is a complex subject, it is argued that terrorists are partially reassured by their religious views that God supports and rewards their actions.[101][102] These conflicts are among the most difficult to resolve, particularly when both sides believe that God is on their side and has endorsed the moral righteousness of their claims.[101] One of the most infamous quote which is associated with religious fanaticism was made during the siege of Béziers in 1209, a Crusader asked the Papal Legate Arnaud Amalric how to differentiate Catholics from Cathars when the city was taken, to which Amalric replied:"Tuez-les tous; Dieu reconnaitra les siens", or "Kill them all; God will recognize his own".[103] Theoretical physicist Michio Kaku considers religious terrorism one of the main threats to humanity's evolution from a Type 0 to a Type 1 civilization.[104] Suppression of scientific progress Galileo Galilei facing the Roman Inquisition, Cristiano Banti[105][106] John William Draper and Andrew Dickson White, authors of the conflict thesis, have argued that when a religion offers a complete set of answers to the problems of purpose, morality, origins, or science, it often discourages exploration of those areas by suppressing curiosity, denies its followers a broader perspective and can prevent social, moral and scientific progress. Examples cited in their writings include the trial of Galileo and Giordano Bruno's execution. During the 19th century, the conflict thesis developed. According to this model, any interaction between religion and science must inevitably lead to open hostility, with religion usually taking the part of the aggressor against new scientific ideas.[107] The historical conflict thesis was a popular historiographical approach in the history of science during the late 19th and early 20th centuries, but its original form had been discredited by the 1980s and is not held by historians of science today.[108][109][110][111] Despite that, conflict theory remains a popular view among the general public[112] and is limited to a few sets of controversies such as creation–evolution, stem cells, and birth control.[113] Books such as The God Delusion still argue for the conflict thesis. Studies on the actual beliefs held by scientists show that most scientists globally do not subscribe to conflict thesis and instead the majority believe that the relation between science and religion is independence or collaboration.[114][115] Historians of science including John Hedley Brooke and Ronald Numbers consider the "religion vs. science" concept an oversimplification, and prefer to take a more nuanced view of the subject.[112][116] These historians cite, for example, the Galileo affair[117] and the Scopes trial;[118] and assert that these were not purely instances of conflict between science and religion as personal and political factors also weighed heavily in the development of each. In addition, some historians contend that religious organizations figure prominently in the broader histories of many sciences, with many of the scientific minds until the professionalization of scientific enterprise (in the 19th century) being clergy and other religious thinkers.[119][120][121] Some historians contend that many scientific developments such as Kepler's laws[122] and the 19th-century reformulation of physics in terms of energy[123] were explicitly driven by religious ideas. Recent examples of tensions have been the creation–evolution controversy, controversies over the use of birth control, opposition to research into embryonic stem cells, or theological objections to vaccination, anesthesia and blood transfusion.[124][125][126][127][128][129] Arguments against the belief that religion is harmful to society Some studies show that some positive links exist in the relationship between religiosity, moral behavior and altruism.[130][131][132] Some studies have shown similar correlations between religiosity and giving.[133] Some argue that religious violence confuses religious moral rules and behaviour with non-religious factors.[134][135][136][137] This includes the claim that events like terrorist bombings are more politically motivated than religious.[136][138][139] Mark Juergensmeyer argues that religion "does not ordinarily lead to violence. That happens only with the coalescence of a peculiar set of circumstances—political, social, and ideological—when religion becomes fused with violent expressions of social aspirations, personal pride, and movements for political change".[140]: 10 and that it is unreasonable to attempt to differentiate "religious violence" and "secular violence" as separate categories.[141] While others assert religion is not inherently violent and while the two are compatible they are not essential and that religious violence can be compared with non-religious violence.[142] C. S. Lewis suggests that all religions by definition involve faith, or a belief in concepts that cannot be proven or disproven by the sciences. Not all religious people subscribe to the idea that religion and science are mutually exclusive (non-overlapping magisteria) as do some atheists including Stephen Jay Gould.[143] Biologist Richard Dawkins has said that religious practitioners often do not believe in the view of non-overlapping magisteria.[144] According to a survey most religious groups in the United States have no general epistemological conflict with science or with the seeking out of scientific knowledge even if there are epistemic or moral conflicts with their faith.[145][146] Strict creationists tend to have very favorable views on many of the different sciences.[147] A study on a national sample of United States college students found that the majority of undergraduates in both the natural and social sciences do not see conflict between science and religion.[148] Cross-national studies polled from 1981 to 2001 on views of science and religion have noted that countries with higher religiosity have stronger trust in science.[149] Morality See also: Human sacrifice, Morality and religion, and Religious intolerance Richard Dawkins contends that theistic religions devalue human compassion and morality. In his view, the Bible contains many injunctions against following one's conscience over scripture and positive actions are supposed to originate not from compassion, but from the fear of punishment.[28] Albert Einstein stated that no religious basis is needed in order to display ethical behavior.[150] Children See also: Indoctrination, Mind control, Religion and children, and Child marriage In the 19th century, philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer argued that teaching some ideas to children at a young age could foster resistance to doubting those ideas later on.[151] Some clerics of Islam have permitted the child marriage of older men to girls as young as 9 years of age.[152] Baptist pastor Jerry Vines denounced Mohammed as a pedophile for marrying and having had sex with a nine-year-old.[153] For example, one organisation cites the case of a 10-year-old girl who was forced to marry and was raped in Yemen (Nujood Ali),[154] a 13-year-old Yemeni girl dying of internal bleeding three days after marriage[155][156] and a 12-year-old girl dying in childbirth after marriage.[152][157] Yemen currently does not have a minimum age for marriage.[158] Latter Day Saint church founder Joseph Smith married girls as young as 13 and 14[159] and other Latter Day Saints married girls as young as 10.[160] The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints eliminated underaged marriages in the 19th century, but several branches of Mormonism continue the practice.[161] Homosexuals Main article: Homosexuality and religion Christian protest against San Francisco Pride 2010 Homosexuality is unambiguously condemned in Abrahamic religions where prohibition and execution of those who engage in male homosexual activity are found in the Old Testament of the Bible and in the Quran. Homosexuals are also condemned in the New Testament several times but without obligatory punishment. In the United States, conservative Christian right groups such as the Christian Legal Society and the Alliance Defense Fund have filed numerous lawsuits against public universities, aimed at overturning policies that protect homosexuals from discrimination and hate speech. These groups argue that such policies infringe their right to freely exercise religion as guaranteed by the Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment of the United States Constitution.[162] Most secularised Christian countries have legalised homosexual activity and several have legalised same-sex marriage. However, not all historically Christian countries have done so such as Russia and Uganda which have introduced discriminatory laws ranging from anti-propaganda laws to corporal punishment. Homosexuality is still illegal in most Muslim countries and several of these countries impose the death penalty for homosexual behavior. In July 2005, two Iranian men aged sixteen and eighteen were, supposedly, hanged for homosexuality, causing an international outcry.[163] They were executed after being convicted by the court of having raped a 13-year-old boy.[164][165][166] The case attracted international media attention. The British lesbian, gay and bisexual group OutRage![167] alleged that the teenagers were executed for consensual homosexual acts and not rape. Racism The Ku Klux Klan frequently used the burning cross to intimidate minorities. In line with other findings which suggest that religious humanitarianism is largely directed at in-group members, greater religious identification, greater extrinsic religiosity and greater religious fundamentalism were associated with racial prejudices. This fact is congruent with the fact that 50% of religious congregations in the US are racially segregated, and only 12% of them have a degree of diversity.[168] Some people have used religion as a justification for advocating racism. The Christian Identity movement has been associated with racism.[169] However, it has been argued that these positions may be reflections of contemporary social views as well as reflections of what has been called scientific racism.[170] The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints had excluded African Americans from the priesthood from 1849 to 1978.[171] Most fundamentalist Mormon sects within the Latter Day Saint movement rejected the Church's 1978 decision to allow black men to hold the priesthood, and in accordance with this view they continue to deny black people's right to play an active role in the church because of their race.[172] Due to these beliefs, in its Spring 2005 "Intelligence Report" the Southern Poverty Law Center added the Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints to its "hate group" listing[173] because of the church's teachings on race, which include strong condemnation of interracial relationships. Women See also: Gender and religion and Women and religion A woman with burqa on walking by the road in northern Afghanistan The content of the holy books of Abrahamic religions contain severe restrictions on the rights of women ranging from prohibiting women from certain behaviour and activities to requiring women to submit to the will of their father and or husband. According to Polly Toynbee, religion interferes with bodily autonomy regardless of gender but fosters particularly negative attitudes towards women's bodies. Toynbee writes: "Women's bodies are always the issue - too unclean to be bishops, and dangerous enough to be covered up by Islam and mikvahed by Judaism".[174] It is argued that religious sexual discrimination leads to unequal relations in marriage, creating norms which subordinate the wife to the husband. The word בעל (ba`al), Hebrew for "husband", used throughout the Bible, is synonymous with "owner" and "master".[175] This mirrors the abrahamic view of God as an omnipotent, perfect power, where this power is one of domination, which is persistently associated with the characteristics of ideal masculinity.[176] Sheila Jeffreys argues:[177] Religion gives authority to traditional, patriarchal beliefs about the essentially subordinate nature of women and their naturally separate roles, such as the need for women to be confined to the private world of the home and family, that women should be obedient to their husbands, that women's sexuality should be modest and under the control of their menfolk, and that women should not use contraception or abortion to limit their childbearing. The practice of such ancient beliefs interferes profoundly with women's abilities to exercise their human rights. Islam See also: Misogyny § Islam, Islam and domestic violence, and Women in Islam Feminist Julie Bindel argues that religions encourage the domination of men over women and she also argues that Islam promotes the submission of women to their husbands by encouraging practices such as child marriage. She wrote that religion "promotes inequality between men and women", that Islam's message for a woman includes that "she will be subservient to her husband and devote her life to pleasing him" and that "Islam's obsession with virginity and childbirth has led to gender segregation and early marriage.[178] Islamic laws have been criticized by human rights organizations for exposing women to mistreatment and violence, preventing women from reporting rape and contributing to the discrimination of women.[179] The United Nations say that Islam is used to justify unnecessary and harmful female genital mutilation, when the purposes range from deprivation of sexual satisfaction to discourage adultery, insuring virginity to their husbands, or generating appearance of virginity.[180] Maryam Namazie argues that in both civil and criminal matters (such as punishments which are imposed on them for improper veiling), women are victimized by Sharia law; and she also argues that women have judicial hurdles that are either lenient or advantageous for men.[181] According to Phyllis Chesler, Islam is connected to violence against women, especially in the form of honor killings. She rejects the argument which states that honor killings are not related to Islam and claims that while fundamentalists of all religions impose restrictions upon women, in Islam, not only are these restrictions harsher, Islam also reacts more violently when these rules are broken.[182] Christianity Main article: Women in Christianity See also: Misogyny in Christianity and Christianity and domestic violence Christianity has been criticized for portraying women as sinful, untrustworthy, deceitful and desiring to seduce and incite men into sexual sin.[183] Katharine M. Rogers argues that Christianity is misogynistic and that the "dread of female seduction" can be found in St. Paul's epistles.[184] K. K. Ruthven argues that the "legacy of Christian misogyny was consolidated by the so-called 'Fathers' of the Church, like Tertullian, who thought a woman was not only 'the gateway of the devil' but also 'a temple built over a sewer'".[185] Jack Holland argues the concept of fall of man is misogynistic as "a myth that blames woman for the ills and sufferings of mankind".[186] In the Middle Ages and the early modern period, Christian religious figures were involved in witch trials, which were generally held in order to punish assertive or independent women such as midwives since witchcraft was often not in evidence,[187] or activists.[188] Animals Shechita slaughter of a chicken Historically, Kosher slaughter has been criticized by non-Jews who have alleged that it is inhumane and unsanitary,[189] in part as an antisemitic canard which states that eating ritually slaughtered meat caused degeneration[190] and in part out of an economic desire to remove Jews from the meat industry.[189] Sometimes, these criticisms were directed at Judaism as a religion. In 1893, animal rights advocates who were campaigning against the practice of kosher slaughter in Aberdeen attempted to link cruelty to animals to Jewish religious practices.[191] In the 1920s, Polish critics of kosher slaughter claimed that the practice actually had no basis in Scripture.[189] To refute this argument, Jewish authorities stated that the slaughter methods are directly based upon Genesis IX:3 and they also stated that "these laws are binding on Jews today".[192] While supporters of kosher slaughter state that Judaism requires the practice precisely because it is considered humane,[192] research which was conducted by Temple Grandin and Joe M. Regenstein in 1994 concluded that—practiced correctly with proper restraint systems—kosher slaughter "probably results in minimal discomfort" because the cattle stand still and do not resist a comfortable head restraint device. They also note that behavioral reactions to the incision which is made during kosher slaughter are weaker than behavioral reactions to noises such as clanging or hissing, inversion or pressure, which are made during restraint.[193] Those who practice and subscribe to Jewish vegetarianism, both religiously and philosophically, disagree with this argument, they state that such a form of animal slaughter is not required while a number of them, including medieval scholars of Judaism such as Joseph Albo and Isaac Arama, regard vegetarianism as a moral ideal, not just out of a concern for animal welfare, but also out of concern for the slaughterer.[194] Other forms of ritual slaughter, such as Islamic ritual slaughter, have also come under controversy. Writing for PETA, Logan Scherer said that animals which are sacrificed according to Islamic law can not be stunned before they are killed.[195] Muslims are only allowed to eat meat that has been prepared according to Sharia law and they say that the Islamic form of ritual slaughter is designed to reduce the amount of pain and distress that the animal suffers.[196] According to the Farm Animal Welfare Committee, halal and kosher practices should be banned because when animals are not stunned before they are slaughtered, they suffer a needless amount of pain for up to two minutes despite the fact that some Muslims and Jews argue that the loss of blood from the slash to the throat renders the animals unconscious relatively quickly.[197] In 2018, Temple Grandin stated that kosher slaughter, no matter how well it is done, is not instantaneous, whereas stunning properly with a captive bolt is instantaneous.[198] Response to criticism of morality Not all religions are hostile to homosexuality. Both Reform Judaism and the Unitarian Universalist Association have advocated for equal rights for gay and lesbian people since the 1970s.[a] Hinduism does not view homosexuality as an issue.[201] Many Christians have made efforts toward establishing racial equality, contributing to the civil rights movement.[202] The African American Review sees as important the role Christian revivalism in the black church played in the civil rights movement.[203] Martin Luther King Jr., an ordained Baptist minister, was a leader of the American civil rights movement and president of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, a Christian civil rights organization.[204] Corrupt purposes of leaders Caricature of Mormon leader Brigham Young's wives at his death Dominionism Main article: Dominionism See also: Dominion theology and Christian reconstructionism The term "dominionism" is often used to describe a political movement among fundamentalist Christians. Critics view dominionism as an attempt to improperly impose Christianity as the national faith of the United States. It emerged in the late 1980s inspired by the book, film and lecture series "Whatever Happened to the Human Race?" by Francis A. Schaeffer and C. Everett Koop.[205] Schaeffer's views influenced conservatives like Jerry Falwell, Pat Robertson, Tim LaHaye, John W. Whitehead and although they represent different theological and political ideas, dominionists believe they have a Christian duty to take "control of a sinful secular society", either by putting fundamentalist Christians in office, or by introducing biblical law into the secular sphere.[124][206][207] Social scientists have used the word "dominionism" to refer to adherence to dominion theology[208][209][210] as well as to the influence in the broader Christian right of ideas inspired by dominion theology.[208] In the early 1990s, sociologist Sara Diamond[211][212] and journalist Frederick Clarkson[213][214] defined "dominionism" as a movement that while including dominion theology and Christian reconstructionism as subsets, it is much broader in scope, extending to much of the Christian right.[215] Beginning in 2004 with essayist Katherine Yurica,[216][217][218] a group of authors including journalist Chris Hedges[219][220][221] Marion Maddox,[222] James Rudin,[223] Sam Harris[224] and the group TheocracyWatch,[225] began applying the term to a broader spectrum of people than have sociologists such as Diamond. Response to criticism of dominionism The few full adherents to reconstructionism are limited to conservative Christians.[226][page needed][227][228] The terms "dominionist" and "dominionism" are rarely used for self-description and their usage has been attacked from several quarters noting that the term is vague, unfairly links evangelicals to extremism, is highly exaggerated and are more akin to conservative smeer in the likes of a conspiracy theory.[229][230][231][232] Kurtz also complained about a perceived link between average Christian evangelicals and extremism such as Christian reconstructionism.[231]This article is about the academic treatment of the Bible as a historical document. For criticisms made against the Bible as a source of reliable information or ethical guidance, see Criticism of the Bible. page with text beginning "Histoire Critique du vieux testament par Le R. P. Richard Simon" Title page of Richard Simon's Critical History (1685), an early work of biblical criticism Part of a series on the Bible The Malmesbury Bible Canons and books Authorship and development Translations and manuscripts Biblical studies ArcheologyArtifactsDating HistoricityInternal consistency PeoplePlacesNames Rahlfs' Septuagint Novum Testamentum Graece Documentary hypothesis Synoptic problem NT textual categories Biblical criticism HistoricalTextualSourceFormRedactionCanonical Interpretation Perspectives Outline of Bible-related topics Bible.malmesbury.arp.jpg Bible portal vte Biblical criticism is the use of critical analysis to understand and explain the Bible. During the eighteenth century, when it began as historical-biblical criticism, it was based on two distinguishing characteristics: (1) the scientific concern to avoid dogma and bias by applying a neutral, non-sectarian, reason-based judgment to the study of the Bible, and (2) the belief that the reconstruction of the historical events behind the texts, as well as the history of how the texts themselves developed, would lead to a correct understanding of the Bible. This sets it apart from earlier, pre-critical methods; from the anti-critical methods of those who oppose criticism-based study; from later post-critical orientation, and from the many different types of criticism which biblical criticism transformed into in the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries. Most scholars believe the German Enlightenment (c. 1650 – c. 1800) led to the creation of biblical criticism, although some assert that its roots reach back to the Reformation. German pietism played a role in its development, as did British deism, with its greatest influences being rationalism and Protestant scholarship. The Enlightenment age, and its skepticism of biblical and church authority, ignited questions concerning the historical basis for the human Jesus separately from traditional theological views concerning his divinity. This quest for the historical Jesus began in biblical criticism's earliest stages, and has remained an interest within biblical criticism, on and off, for over 200 years. Historical-biblical criticism includes a wide range of approaches and questions within four major methodologies: textual, source, form, and literary criticism. Textual criticism examines biblical manuscripts and their content to identify what the original text probably said. Source criticism searches the text for evidence of their original sources. Form criticism identifies short units of text seeking the setting of their origination. Redaction criticism later developed as a derivative of both source and form criticism. Each of these methods was primarily historical and focused on what went on before the texts were in their present form. Literary criticism, which emerged in the twentieth century, differed from these earlier methods. It focused on the literary structure of the texts as they currently exist, determining, where possible, the author's purpose, and discerning the reader's response to the text through methods such as rhetorical criticism, canonical criticism, and narrative criticism. All together, these various methods of biblical criticism permanently changed how people understood and saw the Bible. In the late twentieth and early twenty-first century, biblical criticism was influenced by a wide range of additional academic disciplines and theoretical perspectives which led to its transformation. Having long been dominated by white male Protestant academics, the twentieth century saw others such as non-white scholars, women, and those from the Jewish and Catholic traditions become prominent voices in biblical criticism. Globalization brought a broader spectrum of worldviews into the field, and other academic disciplines as diverse as Near Eastern studies, psychology, cultural anthropology and sociology formed new methods of biblical criticism such as social scientific criticism and psychological biblical criticism. Meanwhile, post-modernism and post-critical interpretation began questioning whether biblical criticism had a role and function at all. With these new methods came new goals, as biblical criticism moved from the historical to the literary, and its basic premise changed from neutral judgment to a recognition of the various biases the reader brings to the study of the texts. Contents 1 Definition 2 History 2.1 Eighteenth century 2.1.1 Historical Jesus: the first quest 2.2 Nineteenth century 2.2.1 Historical Jesus: the lives of Jesus 2.3 Twentieth century 2.3.1 Historical Jesus: the New quest into the twenty-first century 3 Major methods 3.1 Textual criticism 3.1.1 Problems of textual criticism 3.2 Source criticism 3.2.1 Source criticism of the Old Testament: Wellhausen's hypothesis 3.2.1.1 Critique of Wellhausen 3.2.2 Source criticism of the New Testament: the synoptic problem 3.2.2.1 Two-source theory critique 3.3 Form criticism 3.3.1 Critique of form criticism 3.4 Redaction criticism 3.4.1 Redaction Critique 3.5 Literary criticism 3.5.1 Canonical criticism 3.5.2 Rhetorical criticism 3.5.3 Narrative criticism 4 Legacy 4.1 Non-liberal Protestant criticism 4.2 Catholic criticism 4.3 Jewish criticism 4.4 Feminist criticism 4.5 Postcolonial biblical criticism 4.6 African-American biblical criticism 4.7 Queer biblical hermeneutics 4.8 Social scientific criticism 4.9 New historicism 4.10 Post-modern biblical criticism 4.11 Post-critical interpretation 5 Notes 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Definition Daniel J. Harrington defines biblical criticism as "the effort at using scientific criteria (historical and literary) and human reason to understand and explain, as objectively as possible, the meaning intended by the biblical writers."[1] The original biblical criticism has been mostly defined by its historical concerns. Critics focused on the historical events behind the text as well as the history of how the texts themselves developed.[2]: 33 So much biblical criticism has been done as history, and not theology, that it is sometimes called the "historical-critical method" or historical-biblical criticism (or sometimes higher criticism) instead of just biblical criticism.[2]: 31 Biblical critics used the same scientific methods and approaches to history as their secular counterparts and emphasized reason and objectivity.[2]: 45 Neutrality was seen as a defining requirement.[3][2]: 27 By 1990, new perspectives, globalization and input from different academic fields expanded biblical criticism, moving it beyond its original criteria, and changing it into a group of disciplines with different, often conflicting, interests.[4]: 21, 22 Biblical criticism's central concept changed from neutral judgment to beginning from a recognition of the various biases the reader brings to the study of the texts.[4]: 21, 22 Newer forms of biblical criticism are primarily literary: no longer focused on the historical, they attend to the text as it exists now.[4]: 21, 22 History Eighteenth century See also: Historical criticism In the Enlightenment era of the European West, philosophers and theologians such as Thomas Hobbes (1588–1679), Benedict Spinoza (1632–1677), and Richard Simon (1638–1712) began to question the long-established Judeo-Christian tradition that Moses was the author of the first five books of the Bible known as the Pentateuch.[5][6] Spinoza wrote that Moses could not have written the preface to the fifth book, Deuteronomy, since he never crossed the Jordan River into the Promised Land. There were also other problems such as Deuteronomy 31:9 which references Moses in the third person. According to Spinoza: "All these details, the manner of narration, the testimony, and the context of the whole story lead to the plain conclusion that these books were written by another, and not by Moses in person".[7] Jean Astruc, often called the "Father of Biblical criticism", at Centre hospitalier universitaire de Toulouse [fr] Jean Astruc (1684–1766), a French physician, believed these critics were wrong about Mosaic authorship. According to Old Testament scholar Edward Young (1907–1968), Astruc believed that Moses assembled the first book of the Pentateuch, the book of Genesis, using the hereditary accounts of the Hebrew people.[8] Biblical criticism is often said to have begun when Astruc borrowed methods of textual criticism (used to investigate Greek and Roman texts) and applied them to the Bible in search of those original accounts.[9]: 204, 217 Astruc believed that, through this approach, he had identified the separate sources that were edited together into the book of Genesis. The existence of separate sources explained the inconsistent style and vocabulary of Genesis, discrepancies in the narrative, differing accounts and chronological difficulties, while still allowing for Mosaic authorship.[9]: xvi [10] Astruc's work was the genesis of biblical criticism, and because it has become the template for all who followed, he is often called the "Father of Biblical criticism".[9]: 204, 217, 210 The questioning of religious authority common to German Pietism contributed to the rise of biblical criticism.[11]: 6 Rationalism also became a significant influence:[12][13]: 8, 224 Swiss theologian Jean Alphonse Turretin (1671–1737) is an example of the "moderate rationalism" of the era. Turretin believed that the Bible was divine revelation, but insisted that revelation must be consistent with nature and in harmony with reason, "For God who is the author of revelation is likewise the author of reason".[14]: 94, 95 What was seen as extreme rationalism followed in the work of Heinrich Paulus (1761–1851) who denied the existence of miracles. Johann Salomo Semler (1725–1791) had attempted in his work to navigate between divine revelation and extreme rationalism by supporting the view that revelation was "divine disclosure of the truth perceived through the depth of human experience".[14]: 201, 118 He distinguished between "inward" and "outward" religion: for some people, their religion is their highest inner purpose, while for others, religion is a more exterior practice – a tool to accomplish other purposes more important to the individual, such as political or economic goals. Recognition of this distinction now forms part of the modern field of cognitive science of religion.[13]: 43 [15] Semler argued for an end to all doctrinal assumptions, giving historical criticism its nonsectarian character. As a result, Semler is often called the father of historical-critical research.[13]: 43 "Despite the difference in attitudes between the thinkers and the historians [of the German enlightenment], all viewed history as the key ... in their search for understanding".[11]: 214 Communications scholar James A. Herrick (b. 1954) says that even though most scholars agree that biblical criticism evolved out of the German Enlightenment, there are some historians of biblical criticism that have found "strong direct links" with British deism. Herrick references the German theologian Henning Graf Reventlow (1929–2010) as linking deism with the humanist world view, which has been significant in biblical criticism.[16][17]: 13–15 Matthew Tindal (1657–1733), as part of British deism, asserted that Jesus taught an undogmatic natural religion that the Church later changed into its own dogmatic form. Tindal's view of Christianity as a "mere confirmation of natural religion and his resolute denial of the supernatural" led him to conclude that "revealed religion is superfluous".[18] British deism was also an influence on the philosopher and writer Hermann Samuel Reimarus (1694–1768) in developing his criticism of revelation.[17]: 13 The biblical scholar Johann David Michaelis (1717–1791) advocated the use of other Semitic languages in addition to Hebrew to understand the Old Testament, and in 1750, wrote the first modern critical introduction to the New Testament.[19][20] Instead of interpreting the Bible historically, Johann Gottfried Eichhorn (1752–1827), Johann Philipp Gabler (1753–1826), and Georg Lorenz Bauer (1755–1806) used the concept of myth as a tool for interpreting the Bible. Rudolf Bultmann later used this approach, and it became particularly influential in the early twentieth century.[14]: 117 117, 149–150, 188–191 George Ricker Berry says the term "higher criticism", which is sometimes used as an alternate name for historical criticism, was first used by Eichhorn in his three-volume work Einleitung ins Alte Testament (Introduction to the Old Testament) published between 1780 and 1783. The term was originally used to differentiate higher criticism, the term for historical criticism, from lower, which was the term commonly used for textual criticism at the time.[21] The importance of textual criticism means that the term 'lower criticism' is no longer used much in twenty-first century studies.[4]: 108 A twenty–first century view of biblical criticism's origins, that traces it to the Reformation, is a minority position, but the Reformation is the source of biblical criticism's advocacy of freedom from external authority imposing its views on biblical interpretation.[22]: 297–298 [2]: 189 Long before Richard Simon, the historical context of the biblical texts was important to Joachim Camerarius (1500–1574) who wrote a philological study of figures of speech in the biblical texts using their context to understand them.[23] Hugo Grotius (1583–1645) paved the way for comparative religion studies by analyzing New Testament texts in the light of Classical, Jewish and early Christian writings.[24]: 140 Historical Jesus: the first quest Further information: Historical Jesus and Quest for the historical Jesus The first quest for the historical Jesus is also sometimes referred to as the Old Quest.[25]: 888 It began with the publication of Hermann Samuel Reimarus's work after his death. G. E. Lessing (1729–1781) claimed to have discovered copies of Reimarus's writings in the library at Wolfenbüttel when he was the librarian there.[25]: 862 Reimarus had left permission for his work to be published after his death, and Lessing did so between 1774 and 1778, publishing them as Die Fragmente eines unbekannten Autors (The Fragments of an Unknown Author).[26] Over time, they came to be known as the Wolfenbüttel Fragments. Reimarus distinguished between what Jesus taught and how he is portrayed in the New Testament. According to Reimarus, Jesus was a political Messiah who failed at creating political change and was executed by the Roman state as a dissident. His disciples then stole the body and invented the story of the resurrection for personal gain.[17] Albert Schweitzer in The Quest of the Historical Jesus, acknowledges that Reimarus's work "is a polemic, not an objective historical study", while also referring to it as "a masterpiece of world literature."[27]: 22, 16 According to Schweitzer, Reimarus was wrong in his assumption that Jesus's end-of-world eschatology was "earthly and political in character" but was right in viewing Jesus as an apocalyptic preacher, as evidenced by his repeated warnings about the destruction of Jerusalem and the end of time. This eschatological approach to understanding Jesus has since become universal in modern biblical criticism.[27]: viii, 23, 195 Schweitzer also comments that, since Reimarus was a historian and not a theologian or a biblical scholar, he "had not the slightest inkling" that source criticism would provide the solution to the problems of literary consistency that Reimarus had raised.[27]: 15 Reimarus's controversial work garnered a response from Semler in 1779: Beantwortung der Fragmente eines Ungenannten (Answering the Fragments of an Unknown).[28] Schweitzer records that Semler "rose up and slew Reimarus in the name of scientific theology".[27]: 25 Respect for Semler temporarily repressed the dissemination and study of Reimarus's work, but Semler's response had no long-term effect.[27]: 25, 26 Reimarus's writings, on the other hand, did have a long-term effect. They made a lasting change in the practice of biblical criticism by making it clear it could exist independently of theology and faith.[13]: 46 [27]: 23–26 His work also showed biblical criticism could serve its own ends, be governed solely by rational criteria, and reject deference to religious tradition.[13]: 46–48 Reimarus's central question, "How political was Jesus?", continues to be debated by theologians and historians such as Wolfgang Stegemann [de], Gerd Theissen and Craig S. Keener.[29][30][31] In addition to overseeing the publication of Reimarus's work, Lessing made contributions of his own, arguing that the proper study of biblical texts requires knowing the context in which they were written. This is now the accepted scholarly view.[13]: 49 Nineteenth century Professors Richard Soulen and Kendall Soulen write that biblical criticism reached "full flower" in the nineteenth century, becoming the "major transforming fact of biblical studies in the modern period".[4]: 79 The height of biblical criticism's influence is represented by the history of religions school [note 1] a group of German Protestant theologians associated with the University of Göttingen.[4]: 161 In the late nineteenth century, they sought to understand Judaism and Christianity within the overall history of religion.[14]: 222 Other Bible scholars outside the Göttingen school, such as Heinrich Julius Holtzmann (1832–1910), also used biblical criticism. Holtzmann developed the first listing of the chronological order of the New Testament texts based on critical scholarship.[4]: 82 Many insights in understanding the Bible that began in the nineteenth century continue to be discussed in the twenty-first; in some areas of study, such as linguistic tools, scholars merely appropriate earlier work, while in others they "continue to suppose they can produce something new and better".[14]: xiii For example, some modern histories of Israel include historical biblical research from the nineteenth century.[32]: 23 In 1835, and again in 1845, theologian Ferdinand Christian Baur postulated the apostles Peter and Paul had an argument that led to a split between them thereby influencing the mode of Christianity that followed.[33][34]: 91–95 This still occasions widespread debate within topics such as Pauline studies, New Testament Studies, early-church studies, Jewish Law, the theology of grace, and the doctrine of justification.[33]: 286–287 Albrecht Ritschl's challenge to orthodox atonement theory continues to influence Christian thought.[14]: 92 Nineteenth-century biblical critics "thought of themselves as continuing the aims of the Protestant Reformation".[35]: 89 According to Robert M. Grant and David Tracy, "One of the most striking features of the development of biblical interpretation during the nineteenth century was the way in which philosophical presuppositions implicitly guided it".[36]: 91 fn.8 Michael Joseph Brown points out that biblical criticism operated according to principles grounded in a distinctively European rationalism. By the end of the nineteenth century, these principles were recognized by Ernst Troeltsch in an essay, Historical and Dogmatic Method in Theology, where he described three principles of biblical criticism: methodological doubt (a way of searching for certainty by doubting everything); analogy (the idea that we understand the past by relating it to our present); and mutual inter-dependence (every event is related to events that proceeded it).[37] Biblical criticism's focus on pure reason produced a paradigm shift that profoundly changed Christian theology concerning the Jews. Anders Gerdmar [de] uses the legal meaning of emancipation, as in free to be an adult on their own recognizance, when he says the "process of the emancipation of reason from the Bible ... runs parallel with the emancipation of Christianity from the Jews".[38]: 22 In the previous century, Semler had been the first Enlightenment Protestant to call for the "de-Judaizing" of Christianity. While taking a stand against discrimination in society, Semler also wrote theology that was strongly negative toward the Jews and Judaism.[38]: 25, 27 He saw Christianity as something that 'superseded' all that came before it.[38]: 39, 40 This stark contrast between Judaism and Christianity produced increasingly antisemitic sentiments.[38]: 228 Supersessionism, instead of the more traditional millennialism, became a common theme in Johann Gottfried Herder (1744–1803), Friedrich Schleiermacher (1768–1834), Wilhelm Martin Leberecht de Wette (1780–1849), Ferdinand Christian Baur (1792–1860), David Strauss (1808–1874), Albrecht Ritschl (1822–1889), the history of religions school of the 1890s, and on into the form critics of the twentieth century until World War II.[38]: vii–xiii Historical Jesus: the lives of Jesus The late-nineteenth century saw a renewed interest in the quest for the historical Jesus which primarily involved writing versions of the life of Jesus. Important scholars of this quest included David Strauss (1808–1874), whose Life of Jesus used a mythical interpretation of the gospels to undermine their historicity. The book was culturally significant because it contributed to weakening church authority, and it was theologically significant because it challenged the divinity of Christ.[39] In The Essence of Christianity (1900), Adolf Von Harnack (1851–1930) described Jesus as a reformer.[40] William Wrede (1859–1906) rejected all the theological aspects of Jesus and asserted that the "messianic secret" of Jesus as Messiah emerged only in the early community and did not come from Jesus himself.[41] Ernst Renan (1823–1892) promoted the critical method and was opposed to orthodoxy.[42] Wilhelm Bousset (1865–1920) attained honors in the history of religions school by contrasting what he called the joyful teachings of Jesus's new righteousness and what Bousset saw as the gloomy call to repentance made by John the Baptist.[43] While at Göttingen, Johannes Weiss (1863–1914) wrote his most influential work on the apocalyptic proclamations of Jesus.[44] In 1896, Martin Kähler (1835–1912) wrote The So-called Historical Jesus and the Historic Biblical Christ. It critiqued the quest's methodology, with a reminder of the limits of historical inquiry, saying it is impossible to separate the historical Jesus from the Jesus of faith, since Jesus is only known through documents about him as Christ the Messiah.[45]: 10 The Old Quest was not considered closed until Albert Schweitzer (1875–1965) wrote Von Reimarus zu Wrede which was published in English as The Quest of the Historical Jesus in 1910. In it, Schweitzer scathingly critiqued the various books on the life of Jesus that had been written in the late-nineteenth century as reflecting more of the lives of the authors than Jesus.[46] Schweitzer revolutionized New Testament scholarship at the turn of the century by proving to most of that scholarly world that the teachings and actions of Jesus were determined by his eschatological outlook; he thereby finished the quest's pursuit of the apocalyptic Jesus.[35]: 173 [47]: 2–4 Schweitzer concluded that any future research on the historical Jesus was pointless.[45]: 10 Twentieth century In the early twentieth century, biblical criticism was shaped by two main factors and the clash between them. First, form criticism arose and turned the focus of biblical criticism from author to genre, and from individual to community. Next, a scholarly effort to reclaim the Bible's theological relevance began.[4]: 20 Karl Barth (1886–1968), Rudolf Bultmann (1884–1976), and others moved away from concern over the historical Jesus and concentrated instead on the kerygma: the message of the New Testament.[4]: 20 [48] Most scholars agree that Bultmann is one of the "most influential theologians of the twentieth-century", but that he also had a "notorious reputation for his de-mythologizing" which was debated around the world.[49][50] Demythologizing refers to the reinterpretation of the biblical myths (stories) in terms of the existential philosophy of Martin Heidegger (1889–1976).[51] Bultmann claimed myths are "true" anthropologically and existentially but not cosmologically.[52] As a major proponent of form criticism, Bultmann "set the agenda for a subsequent generation of leading NT [New Testament] scholars".[4]: 21 Around the midcentury point the denominational composition of biblical critics began to change. This was due to a shift in perception of the critical effort as being possible on the basis of premises other than liberal Protestantism.[4]: 21 Redaction criticism also began in the mid-twentieth century. While form criticism had divided the text into small units, redaction emphasized the literary integrity of the larger literary units instead.[53][54]: 443 The discovery of the Dead Sea scrolls at Qumran in 1948 renewed interest in archaeology's potential contributions to biblical studies, but it also posed challenges to biblical criticism.[55]: 9, 149 For example, the majority of the Dead Sea texts are closely related to the Masoretic Text that the Christian Old Testament is based upon, while other texts bear a closer resemblance to the Septuagint (the ancient Greek version of the Hebrew texts) and still others are closer to the Samaritan Pentateuch.[55]: 241, 149 [56] This has raised the question of whether or not there is such a thing as an "original text". If there is no original text, the entire purpose of textual criticism is called into question.[13]: 82 New Testament scholar Joachim Jeremias (1900–1979) used linguistics, and Jesus's first-century Jewish environment, to interpret the New Testament.[54]: 495 The biblical theology movement of the 1950s produced debate between Old Testament and New Testament scholars over the unity of the Bible. The rise of redaction criticism closed this debate by bringing about a greater emphasis on diversity.[57] The New quest for the historical Jesus began in 1953 and was so-named in 1959 by James M. Robinson.[25]: 34 After 1970, biblical criticism began to change radically and pervasively.[4]: vii, 21 New criticism, which developed as an adjunct to literary criticism, was concerned with the particulars of style.[58] New historicism, a literary theory that views history through literature, also developed.[59] Biblical criticism began to apply new literary approaches such as structuralism and rhetorical criticism, which concentrated less on history and more on the texts themselves.[60] In the 1970s, the New Testament scholar E. P. Sanders (b. 1937) advanced the New Perspective on Paul, which has greatly influenced scholarly views on the relationship between Pauline Christianity and Jewish Christianity in the Pauline epistles.[61][62] Sanders also advanced study of the historical Jesus by putting Jesus's life in the context of first-century Second-Temple Judaism.[47]: 13–18 In 1974, the theologian Hans Frei published The Eclipse of Biblical Narrative, which became a landmark work leading to the development of post-critical interpretation.[63] The third period of focused study on the historical Jesus began in 1988.[64] By 1990, biblical criticism as a primarily historical discipline changed into a group of disciplines with often conflicting interests.[4]: 21, 22 New perspectives from different ethnicities, feminist theology, Catholicism and Judaism offered insights previously overlooked by the majority of white male Protestants who had dominated biblical criticism from its beginnings.[4]: 21 [note 2] Globalization also brought different worldviews, while other academic fields such as Near Eastern studies, sociology, and anthropology became active in expanding biblical criticism as well. These new points of view created awareness that the Bible can be rationally interpreted from many different perspectives.[4]: 22 In turn, this awareness changed biblical criticism's central concept from the criteria of neutral judgment to that of beginning from a recognition of the various biases the reader brings to the study of the texts.[4]: 22 Historical Jesus: the New quest into the twenty-first century Main articles: Criterion of multiple attestation, Criterion of embarrassment, Criterion of dissimilarity, and Koine Greek painting of three crosses with Jesus in the center and women at his feet Ernst Hildebrand's 1910 painting Kreuzigung Christi depicts the crucifixion of Jesus. The crucifixion is widely regarded by historians as a historical event.[66][67] There is no general agreement among scholars on how to periodize the various quests for the historical Jesus. Most scholars agree the first quest began with Reimarus and ended with Schweitzer, that there was a "no-quest" period in the first half of the twentieth century, and that there was a second quest, known as the "New" quest that began in 1953 and lasted until 1988 when a third began.[25]: 697 However, Stanley E. Porter (b. 1956) calls this periodization "untenable and belied by all of the pertinent facts",[25]: 697, 698 arguing that people were searching for the historical Jesus before Reimarus, and that there never has been a period when scholars weren't doing so.[25]: 698, 699 In 1953, Ernst Käsemann (1906–1998), gave a famous lecture before the Old Marburgers, his former colleagues at the University of Marburg, where he had studied under Bultmann.[68] In this stronghold of support for Bultmann, Käsemann claimed "Bultmann's skepticism about what could be known about the historical Jesus had been too extreme".[45]: 10 Bultmann had claimed that, since the gospel writers wrote theology, their writings could not be considered history, but Käsemann reasoned that one does not necessarily preclude the other.[45]: 10, 11 [69] James M. Robinson named this the New quest in his 1959 essay "The New Quest for the Historical Jesus".[25]: 34 This quest focused largely on the teachings of Jesus as interpreted by existentialist philosophy. Interest waned again by the 1970s.[25]: 668 [45]: 11 N. T. Wright asserts that the third quest began with the Jesus Seminar in 1988. By then, it became necessary to acknowledge that "the upshot of the first two quests ... was to reveal the frustrating limitations of the historical study of any ancient person".[45]: 12 According to Ben Witherington, probability is all that is possible in this pursuit.[45]: 12 Paul Montgomery in The New York Times writes that "Through the ages scholars and laymen have taken various positions on the life of Jesus, ranging from total acceptance of the Bible to assertions that Jesus of Nazareth is a creature of myth and never lived."[70] Sanders explains that, because of the desire to know everything about Jesus, including his thoughts and motivations, and because there are such varied conclusions about him, it seems to many scholars that it is impossible to be certain about anything. Yet according to Sanders, "we know quite a lot" about Jesus.[71] While scholars rarely agree about what is known or unknown about the historical Jesus, according to Witherington, scholars do agree that "the historic questions should not be dodged".[45]: 271 Major methods Theologian David R. Law writes that biblical scholars usually employ textual, source, form, and redaction criticism together. The Old Testament (the Hebrew Bible), and the New Testament, as distinct bodies of literature, each raise their own problems of interpretation - the two are therefore generally studied separately. For purposes of discussion, these individual methods are separated here and the Bible is addressed as a whole, but this is an artificial approach that is used only for the purpose of description, and is not how biblical criticism is actually practiced.[13]: viii–ix Textual criticism Main article: Textual criticism See also: Textual criticism of the New Testament Textual criticism involves examination of the text itself and all associated manuscripts with the aim of determining the original text.[72]: 47 It is one of the largest areas of biblical criticism in terms of the sheer amount of information it addresses. The roughly 900 manuscripts found at Qumran include the oldest extant manuscripts of the Hebrew Bible. They represent every book except Esther, though most books appear only in fragmentary form.[73] The New Testament has been preserved in more manuscripts than any other ancient work, having over 5,800 complete or fragmented Greek manuscripts, 10,000 Latin manuscripts and 9,300 manuscripts in various other ancient languages including Syriac, Slavic, Gothic, Ethiopic, Coptic and Armenian texts. The dates of these manuscripts are generally accepted to range from c.110–125 (the 𝔓52 papyrus) to the introduction of printing in Germany in the fifteenth century. There are also approximately a million direct New Testament quotations in the collected writings of the Church Fathers of the first four centuries. (As a comparison, the next best-sourced ancient text is the Iliad, presumably written by the ancient Greek Homer in the late eighth or early seventh century BCE, which survives in more than 1,900 manuscripts, though many are of a fragmentary nature.[74]) photo of a fragment of papyrus with writing on it The Rylands fragment P52 verso is the oldest existing fragment of New Testament papyrus.[75] It contains phrases from the Book of John. These texts were all written by hand, by copying from another handwritten text, so they are not alike in the manner of printed works. The differences between them are called variants.[4]: 204 A variant is simply any variation between two texts. Many variants are simple misspellings or mis-copying. For example, a scribe might drop one or more letters, skip a word or line, write one letter for another, transpose letters, and so on. Some variants represent a scribal attempt to simplify or harmonize, by changing a word or a phrase.[76] The exact number of variants is disputed, but the more texts survive, the more likely there will be variants of some kind.[77] Variants are not evenly distributed throughout any set of texts. Charting the variants in the New Testament shows it is 62.9 percent variant-free.[78] The impact of variants on the reliability of a single text is usually tested by comparing it to a manuscript whose reliability has been long established. Though many new early manuscripts have been discovered since 1881, there are critical editions of the Greek New Testament, such as NA28 and UBS5, that "have gone virtually unchanged" from these discoveries. "It also means that the fourth century 'best texts', the 'Alexandrian' codices Vaticanus and Sinaiticus, have roots extending throughout the entire third century and even into the second".[79] photo of ancient text of gospel of Luke Folio 41v from Codex Alexandrinus. The Alexandrian textual family is based on this codex.[80] Variants are classified into families. Say scribe 'A' makes a mistake and scribe 'B' does not. Copies of scribe 'A's text with the mistake will thereafter contain that same mistake. Over time the texts descended from 'A' that share the error, and those from 'B' that do not share it, will diverge further, but later texts will still be identifiable as descended from one or the other because of the presence or absence of that original mistake.[81]: 207, 208 The multiple generations of texts that follow, containing the error, are referred to as a "family" of texts. Textual critics study the differences between these families to piece together what the original looked like.[81]: 205 Sorting out the wealth of source material is complex, so textual families were sorted into categories tied to geographical areas. The divisions of the New Testament textual families were Alexandrian (also called the "Neutral text"), Western (Latin translations), and Eastern (used by churches centred on Antioch and Constantinople).[82]: 213 [note 3] Forerunners of modern textual criticism can be found in both early Rabbinic Judaism and in the early church.[13]: 82 Rabbis addressed variants in the Hebrew texts as early as 100CE. Tradition played a central role in their task of producing a standard version of the Hebrew Bible. The Hebrew text they produced stabilized by the end of the second century, and has come to be known as the Masoretic text, the source of the Christian Old Testament.[13]: 82–84 Problems of textual criticism The two main processes of textual criticism are recension and emendation:[81]: 205, 209 Recension is the selection of the most trustworthy evidence on which to base a text. Emendation is the attempt to eliminate the errors which are found even in the best manuscripts. Jerome McGann says these methods innately introduce a subjective factor into textual criticism despite its attempt at objective rules.[84][85] Alan Cooper discusses this difficulty using the example of Amos 6.12 which reads: "Does one plough with oxen?" The obvious answer is "yes", but the context of the passage seems to demand a "no". Cooper explains that a recombination of the consonants allows it to be read "Does one plough the sea with oxen?" The amendment has a basis in the text, which is believed to be corrupted, but is nevertheless a matter of personal judgment.[86] This contributes to textual criticism being one of the most contentious areas of biblical criticism, as well as the largest, with scholars such as Arthur Verrall referring to it as the "fine and contentious art".[87][88][89] It uses specialized methodologies, enough specialized terms to create its own lexicon,[90] and is guided by a number of principles. Yet any of these principles—and their conclusions—can be contested. For example, in the late 1700s, textual critic Johann Jacob Griesbach (1745 – 1812) developed fifteen critical principles for determining which texts are likely the oldest and closest to the original.[82]: 213 One of Griesbach's rules is lectio brevior praeferenda: "the shorter reading is to be preferred". This was based on the assumption that scribes were more likely to add to a text than omit from it, making shorter texts more likely to be older.[91] Latin scholar Albert C. Clark challenged Griesbach's view of shorter texts in 1914.[81]: 212–215 Based on his study of Cicero, Clark argued omission was a more common scribal error than addition, saying "A text is like a traveler who goes from one inn to another losing an article of luggage at each halt".[81]: 213 Clark's claims were criticized by those who supported Griesbach's principles. Clark responded, but disagreement continued. Nearly eighty years later, the theologian and priest James Royse took up the case. After close study of multiple New Testament papyri, he concluded Clark was right, and Griesbach's rule of measure was wrong.[81]: 214 [92] Some twenty-first century scholars have advocated abandoning these older approaches to textual criticism in favor of new computer-assisted methods for determining manuscript relationships in a more reliable way.[83]: 5 Source criticism Main article: Source criticism See also: Pentateuchal criticism Source criticism is the search for the original sources that form the basis of biblical texts. In Old Testament studies, source criticism is generally focused on identifying sources of a single text. For example, the seventeenth-century French priest Richard Simon (1638–1712) was an early proponent of the theory that Moses could not have been the single source of the entire Pentateuch. According to Simon, parts of the Old Testament were not written by individuals at all, but by scribes recording the[which?] community's oral tradition.[93][94]: 1 The French physician Jean Astruc presumed in 1753 that Moses had written the book of Genesis (the first book of the Pentateuch) using ancient documents; he attempted to identify these original sources and to separate them again.[94]: 2 He did this by identifying repetitions of certain events, such as parts of the flood story that are repeated three times, indicating the possibility of three sources. He discovered that the alternation of two different names for God occurs in Genesis and up to Exodus 3 but not in the rest of the Pentateuch, and he also found apparent anachronisms: statements seemingly from a later time than that in which Genesis was set. This and similar evidence led Astruc to hypothesize that the sources of Genesis were originally separate materials that were later fused into a single unit that became the book of Genesis.[9]: 166–168 [95]: 7, 8 Examples of source criticism include its two most influential and well-known theories, the first concerning the origins of the Pentateuch in the Old Testament (Wellhausen's hypothesis); and the second tracing the sources of the four gospels of the New Testament (two-source hypothesis).[96]: 147 Source criticism of the Old Testament: Wellhausen's hypothesis Main articles: Documentary hypothesis and Supplementary hypothesis diagram of Wellhausen's documentary thesis using JEDP with redactor Diagram showing the authors and editors of the Pentateuch (Torah) according to the Documentary hypothesis J: Yahwist (10th–9th century BCE) E: Elohist (9th century BCE) Dtr1: early (7th century BCE) Deuteronomist historian Dtr2: later (6th century BCE) Deuteronomist historian P*: Priestly (6th–5th century BCE) D†: Deuteronomist R: redactor DH: Deuteronomistic history (books of Joshua, Judges, Samuel, Kings) [97]: 62 [98]: 5 Source criticism's most influential work is Julius Wellhausen's Prolegomena zur Geschichte Israels (Prologue to the History of Israel, 1878) which sought to establish the sources of the first five books of the Old Testament - collectively known as the Pentateuch.[99][95]: 95 Wellhausen correlated the history and development of those five books with the development of the Jewish faith.[95]: 95 [100] The Wellhausen hypothesis (also known as the JEDP theory, or the Documentary hypothesis, or the Graf–Wellhausen hypothesis) proposes that the Pentateuch was combined out of four separate and coherent (unified single) sources (not fragments). J stands for the Yahwist source, (Jahwist in German), and was considered[by whom?] to be the most primitive in style and therefore the oldest. E (for Elohist) was thought to be a product of the Northern Kingdom before BCE 721; D (for Deuteronomist) was said to be written shortly before it was found in BCE 621 by King Josiah of Judah (2 Chronicles 34:14-30).[97]: 62 [98]: 5 Old Testament scholar Karl Graf (1815–1869) suggested an additional priestly source in 1866; by 1878, Wellhausen had incorporated this source, P, into his theory, which is thereafter sometimes referred to as the Graf–Wellhausen hypothesis. Wellhausen argued that P had been composed during the exile of the 6th century BCE, under the influence of Ezekiel.[54]: 69 [97]: 5 These sources are supposed to have been edited together by a late final Redactor (R) who is only imprecisely understood.[101] Later scholars added to and refined Wellhausen's theory. For example, the Newer Documentary Thesis inferred more sources, with increasing information about their extent and inter-relationship.[32]: 49–52 The fragmentary theory was a later understanding of Wellhausen produced by form criticism. This theory argues that fragments of documents — rather than continuous, coherent documents — are the sources for the Pentateuch.[32]: 38, 39 Alexander Geddes and Johann Vater proposed that some of these fragments were quite ancient, perhaps from the time of Moses, and were brought together only at a later time.[102]: 32 This accounts for diversity but not structural and chronological consistency.[32]: 38 One can see the Supplementary hypothesis as yet another evolution of Wellhausen's theory that solidified in the 1970s. Proponents of this view assert three sources for the Pentateuch: the Deuteronomist as the oldest source, the Elohist as the central core document, with a number of fragments or independent sources as the third.[102]: 32 Deuteronomy is seen as a single coherent document with a uniformity of style and language in spite of also having different literary strata.[102]: 92 This observation led to the idea there was such a thing as a Deuteronomist school that had originally edited and kept the document updated. This meant the supplementary model became the literary model most widely agreed upon for Deuteronomy, which then supports its application to the remainder of the Pentateuch as well.[102]: 93 Critique of Wellhausen Advocates of Wellhausen's hypothesis contend it accounts well for the differences and duplication found in the Pentateuchal books.[103]: 58, 59 Furthermore, they argue, it provides an explanation for the peculiar character of the material labeled P, which reflects the perspective and concerns of Israel's priests. Wellhausen's theory went virtually unchallenged until the 1970s, when it began to be heavily criticized.[104] By the end of the 1970s and into the 1990s, "one major study after another, like a series of hammer blows, has rejected the main claims of the Documentary theory, and the criteria on the basis of which they were argued".[105]: 95 It has been criticized for its dating of the sources, and for assuming that the original sources were coherent or complete documents. Studies of the literary structure of the Pentateuch have shown J and P used the same structure, and that motifs and themes cross the boundaries of the various sources, which undermines arguments for their separate origins.[98]: 4 [102]: 36 [note 4] Problems and criticisms of the Documentary hypothesis have been brought on by literary analysts who point out the error of judging ancient Eastern writings as if they were the products of western European Protestants; and by advances in anthropology that undermined Wellhausen's assumptions about how cultures develop; and also by various archaeological findings showing the cultural environment of the early Hebrews was more advanced than Wellhausen thought.[97]: 64 [102]: 39, 80 [107]: 11 [108][note 5] As a result, few biblical scholars of the twenty-first century hold to Wellhausen's Documentary hypothesis in its classical form.[107]: 15 As Nicholson says: "it is in sharp decline—some would say in a state of advanced rigor mortis—and new solutions are being argued and urged in its place".[105]: 96 Yet no replacement has so far been agreed upon: "the work of Wellhausen, for all that it needs revision and development in detail, remains the securest basis for understanding the Pentateuch".[105]: vi Source criticism of the New Testament: the synoptic problem Diagram summarizing the two source hypothesis The widely accepted two-source hypothesis, showing two sources for both Matthew and Luke Diagram summarizing Streeter's four-source hypothesis B. H. Streeter's four-source hypothesis, showing four sources each for Matthew and Luke with the colors representing the different sources In New Testament studies, source criticism has taken a slightly different approach from Old Testament studies by focusing on identifying the common sources of multiple texts instead of looking for the multiple sources of a single set of texts. This has revealed that the Gospels are both products of sources and sources themselves.[112] As sources, Matthew, Mark and Luke are partially dependent on each other and partially independent of each other. This is called the synoptic problem, and explaining it is the single greatest dilemma of New Testament source criticism. Any explanation offered must "account for (a) what is common to all the Gospels; (b) what is common to any two of them; (c) what is peculiar to each".[113]: 87 Multiple theories exist to address the dilemma, with none universally agreed upon, but two theories have become predominant: the two-source hypothesis and the four-source hypothesis.[96]: 136–138 Mark is the shortest of the four gospels with only 661 verses, but 600 of those verses are in Matthew and 350 of them are in Luke. Some of these verses are verbatim. Most scholars agree that this indicates Mark was a source for Matthew and Luke. There is also some verbatim agreement between Matthew and Luke of verses not found in Mark.[113]: 85–87 In 1838, the religious philosopher Christian Hermann Weisse developed a theory about this. He postulated a hypothetical collection of the sayings of Jesus from an additional source called Q, taken from Quelle, which is German for "source".[113]: 86 If this document existed, it has now been lost, but some of its material can be deduced indirectly. There are five highly detailed arguments in favor of Q's existence: the verbal agreement of Mark and Luke, the order of the parables, the doublets, a discrepancy in the priorities of each gospel, and each one's internal coherence.[114]: 41 Q allowed the two-source hypothesis to emerge as the best supported of the various synoptic solutions.[114]: 12 [115]: fn.6 There is also material unique to each gospel. This indicates additional separate sources for Matthew and for Luke. Biblical scholar B. H. Streeter used this insight to refine and expand the two-source theory into a four-source theory in 1925.[116]: 5 [117]: 157 Two-source theory critique While most scholars agree that the two-source theory offers the best explanation for the Synoptic problem, and some say it has been solved, others say it is not solved satisfactorily.[118] Donald Guthrie says no single theory offers a complete solution as there are complex and important difficulties that create challenges to every theory.[96]: 208 [119] One example is Basil Christopher Butler's challenge to the legitimacy of two-source theory, arguing it contains a Lachmann fallacy[120]: 110 that says the two-source theory loses cohesion when it is acknowledged that no source can be established for Mark.[116]: 149 F. C. Grant posits multiple sources for the Gospels.[117]: 158 Form criticism Main articles: Form criticism and Sitz im Leben Form criticism began in the early twentieth century when theologian Karl Ludwig Schmidt observed that Mark's Gospel is composed of short units. Schmidt asserted these small units were remnants and evidence of the oral tradition that preceded the writing of the gospels.[121]: 242 [122]: 1 Bible scholar Richard Bauckham says this "most significant insight," which established the foundation of form criticism, has never been refuted.[121]: 243 Hermann Gunkel (1862–1932) and Martin Dibelius (1883–1947) built from this insight and pioneered form criticism. By the 1950s and 1960s, Rudolf Bultmann and form criticism were the "center of the theological conversation in both Europe and North America".[123]: xiii Form criticism breaks the Bible down into its short units, called pericopes, which are then classified by genre: prose or verse, letters, laws, court archives, war hymns, poems of lament, and so on. Form criticism then theorizes concerning the individual pericope's Sitz im Leben ("setting in life" or "place in life"). Based on their understanding of folklore, form critics believed the early Christian communities formed the sayings and teachings of Jesus themselves, according to their needs (their "situation in life"), and that each form could be identified by the situation in which it had been created and vice versa.[124]: 271 Critique of form criticism In the early to mid twentieth century, form critics thought finding oral "laws of development" within the New Testament would prove the form critic's assertions that the texts had evolved within the early Christian communities according to sitz im leben. Since Mark was believed to be the first gospel, the form critics looked for the addition of proper names for anonymous characters, indirect discourse being turned into direct quotation, and the elimination of Aramaic terms and forms, with details becoming more concrete in Matthew, and then more so in Luke.[125] Instead, in the 1970s, New Testament scholar E. P. Sanders wrote that: "There are no hard and fast laws of the development of the Synoptic tradition... On all counts the tradition developed in opposite directions. It became both longer and shorter, both more and less detailed, and both more and less Semitic".[124]: 298 [note 6] Scholars from the 1970s and into the 1990s, produced an "explosion of studies" on structure, genre, text-type, setting and language that challenged several of form criticism's aspects and assumptions.[127]: 42, 70 [note 7] For example, the period of the twentieth century dominated by form criticism is marked by Bultmann's extreme skepticism concerning what can be known about the historical Jesus and his sayings.[131] Some form critics assumed these same skeptical presuppositions[132] based largely on their understanding of oral transmission and folklore. During the latter half of the twentieth century, field studies of cultures with existing oral traditions directly impacted many of these presuppositions.[124]: 296–298 In 1978, research by linguists Milman Parry and Albert Bates Lord was used to undermine Gunkel's belief that "short narratives evolved into longer cycles".[122]: 10 Within these oral cultures, literacy did not replace memory in a natural evolution. Instead, writing was used to enhance memory in an overlap of written and oral tradition.[122]: 16, 17 Susan Niditch concluded from her orality studies that: "no longer are many scholars convinced ... that the most seemingly oral-traditional or formulaic pieces are earliest in date".[122]: 10, 11 In this manner, compelling evidence developed against the form critical belief that Jesus's sayings were formed by Christian communities. As John Niles indicates, the "older idea of 'an ideal folk community—an undifferentiated company of rustics, each of whom contributes equally to the process of oral tradition,' is no longer tenable".[124]: 265, 298–304 According to Eddy and Boyd, these various conclusions directly undermine assumptions about Sitz im leben: "In light of what we now know of oral traditions, no necessary correlation between [the literary] forms and life situations [sitz im leben] can be confidently drawn".[124]: 296–298 Form critics assumed the early Church was heavily influenced by the Hellenistic culture that surrounded first-century Palestine, but in the 1970s, Sanders, as well as Gerd Theissen, sparked new rounds of studies that included anthropological and sociological perspectives, reestablishing Judaism as the predominant influence on Jesus, Paul, and the New Testament.[133]: 46 New Testament scholar N. T. Wright says, "The earliest traditions of Jesus reflected in the Gospels are written from the perspective of Second Temple Judaism [and] must be interpreted from the standpoint of Jewish eschatology and apocalypticism".[133]: 47 [134] According to religion scholar Werner H. Kelber, form critics throughout the mid-twentieth century were so focused on finding each pericope's original form, that they were distracted from any serious consideration of memory as a dynamic force in the construction of the gospels or the early church community tradition.[130]: 276–278 What Kelber refers to as the "astounding myopia" of the form critics has revived interest in memory as an analytical category within biblical criticism.[135][130]: 278 For some, the many challenges to form criticism mean its future is in doubt.[note 8] Bible scholar Tony Campbell says: Form criticism had a meteoric rise in the early part of the twentieth century and fell from favor toward its end. For some, the future of form criticism is not an issue: it has none. But if form criticism embodies an essential insight, it will continue.[129]: 15 ... Two concerns ... give it its value: concern for the nature of the text and for its shape and structure. ... If the encrustations can be scraped away, the good stuff may still be there.[136]: 219 [129]: 16 Redaction criticism diagram of how much of gospels is shared and different Correlations of text in the Synoptic gospels[137] Redaction is the process of editing multiple sources, often with a similar theme, into a single document. It was derived from a combination of both source and form criticism.[138]: 98 As in source criticism, it is necessary to identify the traditions before determining how the redactor used them.[138]: 98 [13]: 181 Form critics saw the synoptic writers as mere collectors and focused on the Sitz im Leben as the creator of the texts, whereas redaction critics have dealt more positively with the Gospel writers, asserting an understanding of them as theologians of the early church.[138]: 99 [139] Redaction critics reject source and form criticism's description of the Bible texts as mere collections of fragments. Where form critics fracture the biblical elements into smaller and smaller individual pieces, redaction critics attempt to interpret the whole literary unit.[138]: 99 Norman Perrin defines redaction criticism as "the study of the theological motivation of an author as it is revealed in the collection, arrangement, editing, and modification of traditional material, and in the composition of new material ... redaction criticism directs us to the author as editor."[128]: 14 Redaction criticism developed after World War II in Germany and arrived in England and North America by the 1950s.[138]: 96–97 It focuses on discovering how and why the literary units were originally edited—"redacted"—into their final forms.[24]: 820 Redaction Critique Redaction critics assume an extreme skepticism toward the historicity of Jesus and the gospels, just as form critics do, which has been seen by some scholars as a bias. The process of redaction seeks the historical community of the final redactors of the gospels, though there are often no textual clues. Porter and Adams say the redactive method of finding the final editor's theology is flawed.[140]: 335, 336 In the New Testament, redaction critics attempt to discern the original author/evangelist's theology by focusing and relying upon the differences between the gospels, yet it is unclear whether every difference has theological meaning, how much meaning, or whether any given difference is a stylistic or even an accidental change. Further, it is not at all clear whether the difference was made by the evangelist, who could have used the already changed story when writing a gospel.[140]: 336 The evangelist's theology more likely depends on what the gospels have in common as well as their differences.[140]: 336 Harrington says, "over-theologizing, allegorizing, and psychologizing are the major pitfalls encountered" in redaction criticism.[138]: 100 Followers of other theories concerning the Synoptic problem, such as those who support the Greisbach hypothesis which says Matthew was written first, Luke second, and Mark third, have pointed to weaknesses in the redaction-based arguments for the existence of Q and Markan priority.[141] Mark Goodacre says "Some scholars have used the success of redaction criticism as a means of supporting the existence of Q, but this will always tend toward circularity, particularly given the hypothetical nature of Q which itself is reconstructed by means of redaction criticism".[141] Literary criticism Main article: Literary criticism In the mid-twentieth century, literary criticism began to develop, shifting scholarly attention from historical and pre-compositional matters to the text itself, thereafter becoming the dominant form of biblical criticism in a relatively short period of about thirty years. It can be said to have begun in 1957 when literary critic Northrop Frye wrote an analysis of the Bible from the perspective of his literary background by using literary criticism to understand the Bible forms.[142][143]: 3–4 Hans Frei proposed that "biblical narratives should be evaluated on their own terms" rather than by taking them apart in the manner we evaluate philosophy or historicity.[54]: 99 Frei was one of several external influences that moved biblical criticism from a historical to a literary focus.[143]: 3 [144] New Testament scholar Paul R. House says the discipline of linguistics, new views of historiography, and the decline of older methods of criticism were also influential in that process.[143]: 3 By 1974, the two methodologies being used in literary criticism were rhetorical analysis and structuralism.[143]: 4, 11 Rhetorical analysis divides a passage into units, observes how a single unit shifts or breaks, taking special note of poetic devices, meter, parallelism, word play and so on. It then charts the writer's thought progression from one unit to the next, and finally, assembles the data in an attempt to explain the author's intentions behind the piece.[143]: 8, 9 Critics of rhetorical analysis say there is a "lack of a well-developed methodology" and that it has a "tendency to be nothing more than an exercise in stylistics".[143]: 425 Structuralism looks at the language to discern "layers of meaning" with the goal of uncovering a work's "deep structures" – the premises as well as the purposes of the author.[143]: 102 In 1981 literature scholar Robert Alter also contributed to the development of biblical literary criticism by publishing an influential analysis of biblical themes from a literary perspective. The 1980s saw the rise of formalism, which focuses on plot, structure, character and themes[143]: 164 and the development of reader-response criticism which focuses on the reader rather than the author.[143]: 374, 410 New Testament scholar Donald Guthrie highlights a flaw in the literary critical approach to the Gospels: the genre of the Gospels has not been fully determined. No conclusive evidence has yet been produced to settle the question of genre, and without genre, no adequate parallels can be found, and without parallels "it must be considered to what extent the principles of literary criticism are applicable".[96]: 19 The validity of using the same critical methods for novels and for the Gospels, without the assurance the Gospels are actually novels, must be questioned.[96]: 20 Canonical criticism Main article: Canonical criticism As a type of literary criticism, canonical criticism has both theological and literary roots. Its origins are found in the Church's views of the biblical writings as sacred, and in the secular literary critics who began to influence biblical scholarship in the 1940s and 1950s. By the mid-twentieth century, the high level of departmentalization in biblical criticism, with its large volume of data and absence of applicable theology, had begun to produce a level of dissatisfaction among both scholars and faith communities.[145]: 4 Brevard S. Childs (1923–2007) proposed an approach to bridge that gap that came to be called canonical criticism. Canonical criticism "signaled a major and enduring shift in biblical studies".[145]: 4 Canonical criticism does not reject historical criticism, but it does reject its claim to "unique validity".[146]: 80 John Barton says that canonical criticism does not simply ask what the text might have originally meant, it asks what it means to the current believing community, and it does so in a manner different from any type of historical criticism.[146]: 89–91 John H. Hayes and Carl Holladay say "canonical criticism has several distinguishing features": (1) Canonical criticism is synchronic; it sees all biblical writings as standing together in time instead of focusing on the diachronic questions of the historical approach.[147]: 154 (2) Canonical critics approach the books as whole units instead of focusing on pieces. They accept that many texts have been composed over long periods of time, but the canonical critic wishes "to interpret the last edition of a biblical book" and then relate books to each other.[147]: 155 (3) Canonical criticism opposes form criticism's isolation of individual passages from their canonical setting.[147]: 155 (4) Canonical criticism emphasizes the relationship between the text and its reader in an effort to reclaim the relationship between the texts and how they were used in the early believing communities. Canonical critics focus on reader interaction with the biblical writing.[147]: 156 (5) "Canonical criticism is overtly theological in its approach". Critics are interested in what the text means for the community—"the community of faith whose predecessors produced the canon, that was called into existence by the canon, and seeks to live by the canon".[147]: 156 Rhetorical criticism Main article: Rhetorical criticism Rhetorical criticism is also a type of literary criticism. While James Muilenburg (1896–1974) is often referred to as "the prophet of rhetorical criticism",[148] it is Herbert A. Wichelns who is credited with "creating the modern discipline of rhetorical criticism" with his 1925 essay "The Literary Criticism of Oratory".[149]: 29 In that essay, Wichelns says that rhetorical criticism and other types of literary criticism differ from each other because rhetorical criticism is only concerned with "effect. It regards a speech as a communication to a specific audience, and holds its business to be the analysis and appreciation of the orator's method of imparting his ideas to his hearers".[149]: 29 Rhetorical criticism is a qualitative analysis. This qualitative analysis involves three primary dimensions: (1) analyzing the act of criticism and what it does; (2) analyzing what goes on within the rhetoric being analyzed and what is created by that rhetoric; and (3) understanding the processes involved in all of it.[149]: 6 Sonja K. Foss discusses ten different methods of rhetorical criticism in her book Rhetorical Criticism: Exploration and Practice saying that each method will produce different insights.[149]: ix, 9 Biblical rhetorical criticism makes use of understanding the "forms, genres, structures, stylistic devices and rhetorical techniques" common to the Near Eastern literature of the different ages when the separate books of biblical literature were written. It attempts to discover and evaluate the rhetorical devices, language, and methods of communication used within the texts by focusing on the use of "repetition, parallelism, strophic structure, motifs, climax, chiasm and numerous other literary devices".[150] Phyllis Trible, a student of Muilenburg, has become one of the leaders of rhetorical criticism and is known for her detailed literary analysis and her feminist critique of biblical interpretation.[151] Narrative criticism Main article: Narrative criticism In the last half of the twentieth century, historical critics began to recognize that being limited to the historical meant the Bible was not being studied in the manner of other ancient writings. In 1974, Hans Frei pointed out that a historical focus neglects the "narrative character" of the gospels. Critics began asking if these texts should be understood on their own terms before being used as evidence of something else.[152]: 2, 3 According to Mark Allen Powell the difficulty in understanding the gospels on their own terms is determining what those terms are: "The problem with treating the gospels 'just like any other book' is that the gospels are not like any other book".[152]: 3 The New Critics, (whose views were absorbed by narrative criticism), rejected the idea that background information holds the key to the meaning of the text, and asserted that meaning and value reside within the text itself.[152]: 4 It is now accepted as "axiomatic in literary circles that the meaning of literature transcends the historical intentions of the author".[152]: 5 As a form of literary criticism, narrative criticism approaches scripture as story.[152]: 7 Christopher T. Paris says that, "narrative criticism admits the existence of sources and redactions but chooses to focus on the artistic weaving of these materials into a sustained narrative picture".[153] Narrative criticism was first used to study the New Testament in the 1970s, with the works of David Rhoads, Jack D. Kingsbury, R. Alan Culpepper, and Robert C. Tannehill.[152]: 6 A decade later, this new approach in biblical criticism included the Old Testament as well. The first article labeled narrative criticism was "Narrative Criticism and the Gospel of Mark," published in 1982 by Bible scholar David Rhoads.[154]: 167 Stephen D. Moore has written that "as a term, narrative criticism originated within biblical studies", but its method was borrowed from narratology.[154]: 166 It was also influenced by New Criticism which saw each literary work as a freestanding whole with intrinsic meaning.[154]: 166 Sharon Betsworth says Robert Alter's work is what adapted New Criticism to the Bible.[154]: 166 Scholars such as Robert Alter and Frank Kermode sought to teach readers to "appreciate the Bible itself by training attention on its artfulness—how [the text] orchestrates sound, repetition, dialogue, allusion, and ambiguity to generate meaning and effect".[155] Legacy See also: Social criticism, Postmodernism, Feminist literary criticism, and Psychological biblical criticism Ken and Richard Soulen say that "biblical criticism has permanently altered the way people understand the Bible".[4]: 22 One way of understanding this change is to see it as a cultural enterprise. Jonathan Sheehan has argued that critical study meant the Bible had to become a primarily cultural instrument. It could no longer be a Catholic Bible or a Lutheran Bible but had to be divested of its scriptural character within specific confessional hermeneutics.[156]: 9 As a result, the Bible is no longer thought of solely as a religious artifact, and its interpretation is no longer restricted to the community of believers.[157]: 129 The Bible's cultural impact is studied in multiple academic fields, producing not only the cultural Bible, but the modern academic Bible as well.[158][156]: 9 Soulen adds that biblical criticism's "leading practitioners ... have set standards of industry, acumen, and insight that remain pace-setting today."[4]: 22 Biblical criticism not only made study of the Bible secularized and scholarly, it also went in the other direction and made it more democratic. It began to be recognized that: "Literature was written not just for the dons of Oxford and Cambridge, but also for common folk... Opposition to authority, especially ecclesiastical [church authority], was widespread, and religious tolerance was on the increase".[14] Old orthodoxies were questioned and radical views tolerated. Scholars began writing in their common languages making their works available to a larger public.[14] In this way, biblical criticism also led to conflict. Many like Roy A. Harrisville believe biblical criticism was created by those hostile to the Bible.[159] There are aspects of biblical criticism that have not only been hostile to the Bible, but also to the religions whose scripture it is, in both intent and effect.[2]: 119, 120 So biblical criticism became, in the perception of many, an assault on religion, especially Christianity, through the "autonomy of reason" which it espoused.[160] Part of the legacy of biblical criticism is that, as it rose, it led to the decline of biblical authority.[2]: 137 J. W. Rogerson summarizes: By 1800 historical criticism in Germany had reached the point where Genesis had been divided into two or more sources, the unity of authorship of Isaiah and Daniel had been disputed, the interdependence of the first three gospels had been demonstrated, and miraculous elements in the OT and NT [Old and New Testaments] had been explained as resulting from the primitive or pre-scientific outlook of the biblical writers.[161] Jeffrey Burton Russell describes it thus: "Faith was transferred from the words of scripture itself to those of influential biblical critics ... liberal Christianity retreated hastily before the advance of science and biblical criticism. By the end of the eighteenth century, advanced liberals had abandoned the core of Christian beliefs."[162]: 151, 153 This created an "intellectual crisis" in American Christianity of the early twentieth century which led to a backlash against the critical approach. This backlash produced a fierce internal battle for control of local churches, national denominations, divinity schools and seminaries.[163]: 93 On one hand, Rogerson says that "historical criticism is not inherently inimical to Christian belief".[161] On the other hand, as Michael Fishbane frankly wrote in 1992, "No longer are we sustained within a biblical matrix... The labor of many centuries has expelled us from this edenic womb and its wellsprings of life and knowledge... [The] Bible has lost its ancient authority".[157]: 121 The most profound legacy of the loss of biblical authority is the formation of the modern world itself, according to religion and ethics scholar Jeffrey Stout.[163]: 6 [164] "There are those who regard the desacralization of the Bible as the fortunate condition for the rise of new sensibilities and modes of imagination" that went into developing the modern world.[157]: 121 For many, biblical criticism "released a host of threats" to the Christian faith. For others biblical criticism "proved to be a failure, due principally to the assumption that diachronic, linear research could master any and all of the questions and problems attendant on interpretation".[159] Still others believed that biblical criticism, "shorn of its unwarranted arrogance," could be a reliable source of interpretation.[159] Fishbane asserts that the significant question for those who continue in any community of Jewish or Christian faith is, after 200 years of biblical criticism: can the text still be seen as sacred? "[T]his question affects our innermost cultural being and traces our relationship to the foundational text of our religious and cultural origins".[157]: 121 He compares biblical criticism to Job, a prophet who destroyed "self-serving visions for the sake of a more honest crossing from the divine textus to the human one".[157]: 129 Or as Rogerson says: biblical criticism has been liberating for those who want their faith "intelligently grounded and intellectually honest".[161] Fishbane writes: the traditional sacrality of the Bible is at once simple and symbolic, individual and communal, practical and paradoxical. But times have changed... [In the twenty-first century,] [c]an the notion of a sacred text be retrieved? ... It is arguably one of Judaism's greatest contributions to the history of religions to assert that the divine Reality is communicated to mankind through words... our hermeneutical hope is in the indissoluble link between the divine and human textus... It is at such points that the ancient theophanic power of illimitable divinity may yet breakthrough swollen words... Thus, ... we may say that the Bible itself may help to retrieve the notion of a sacred text.[157]: 126, 129 By the end of the twentieth century, multiple new points of view changed biblical criticism's central concepts and its goals, leading to the development of a group of new and different biblical-critical disciplines.[4]: 21, 22 Non-liberal Protestant criticism One legacy of biblical criticism in American culture is the American fundamentalist movement of the 1920s and 1930s. Fundamentalism began, at least partly, as a response to the biblical criticism of nineteenth century liberalism.[165][166]: 4 Some fundamentalists believed liberal critics had invented an entirely new religion "completely at odds with the Christian faith".[167]: 29 There have also been conservative Protestants who accepted biblical criticism, and this too is part of biblical criticism's legacy. William Robertson Smith (1846–1894) is an example of a nineteenth century evangelical who believed historical criticism was a legitimate outgrowth of the Protestant Reformation's focus on the biblical text. He saw it as a "necessary tool to enable intelligent churchgoers" to understand the Bible, and was a pioneer in establishing the final form of the supplementary hypothesis of the documentary hypothesis.[22]: 298 A similar view was later advocated by the Primitive Methodist biblical scholar A. S. Peake (1865–1929).[22]: 298 Conservative Protestant scholars have continued the tradition of contributing to critical scholarship.[168]: 140–142 Mark Noll says that "in recent years, a steadily growing number of well qualified and widely published scholars have broadened and deepened the impact of evangelical scholarship".[168]: 135 Edwin M. Yamauchi is a recognized expert on Gnosticism; Gordon Fee has done exemplary work in textual criticism; Richard Longenecker is a student of Jewish-Christianity and the theology of Paul. "[It] is safe to conclude that in many measurable features contemporary evangelical scholarship on the scriptures enjoys a considerable good health".[168]: 136, 137, 141 Catholic criticism Throughout the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, Catholic theology avoided biblical criticism because of its reliance on rationalism, preferring instead to engage in traditional exegesis, based on the works of Jerome.[169]: 90 That began to change in the nineteenth century when, in 1890, the French Dominican Marie-Joseph Lagrange (1855–1938) established a school in Jerusalem called the École prátique d'études biblique, which became the École Biblique in 1920, to encourage study of the Bible using the historical-critical method.[170]: 300 Two years later, Lagrange funded a journal (Revue Biblique), spoke at various conferences, wrote Bible commentaries that incorporated textual critical work of his own, did pioneering work on biblical genres and forms, and laid the path to overcoming resistance to the historical-critical method among his fellow scholars.[170]: 301 These trends were at first firmly rejected by the Church: in 1864 Pope Pius IX promulgated the Syllabus Errorum ("Syllabus of Errors"), which, among other things, condemned rationalistic interpretation of the Bible. In 1871 the First Vatican Council rejected biblical criticism, reaffirming that the Bible was written by God and that it was inerrant.[171] On 18 November 1893, Pope Leo XIII condemned biblical scholarship that was based purely on rationalism in his encyclical letter Providentissimus Deus ('The most provident God'). The letter also outlined principles of scripture study, gave guidelines for how scripture was to be taught in seminaries, and declared that no exegete was allowed to interpret a text to contradict Church doctrine. Modernist biblical criticism was again condemned by Pope Pius X in the papal syllabus Lamentabili sane exitu ("With truly lamentable results") and in his papal encyclical Pascendi Dominici gregis ("Feeding the Lord's Flock"), which labelled it as heretical.[172] Such positions were later confirmed by Pope Benedict XV in his papal encyclical Spiritus Paraclitus ("Paraclete Spirit").[173][169]: 99, 100 In 1943, on the fiftieth anniversary of the Providentissimus Deus, Pope Pius XII issued the papal encyclical Divino Afflante Spiritu ('Inspired by the Holy Spirit') sanctioning historical criticism, opening a new epoch in Catholic critical scholarship. The Jesuit Augustin Bea (1881–1968) had played a vital part in its publication.[22]: 298 [174] The dogmatic constitution Dei verbum ("Word of God"), approved by the Second Vatican Council and promulgated by Pope Paul VI in 1965 furtherly sanctioned biblical criticism.[175] Raymond E. Brown, Joseph A. Fitzmyer and Roland E. Murphy were the most famous Catholic scholars to apply biblical criticism and the historical-critical method in analyzing the Bible: together, they authored The Jerome Biblical Commentary and The New Jerome Biblical Commentary the later of which is still one of the most used textbooks in Catholic Seminaries of the United States.[176][177] The Jerome Biblical Commentary for the Twenty-First Century, a third fully revised edition, will be published in 2022 and will be edited by John J. Collins, Gina Hens-Piazza, Barbara Reid and Donald Senior.[178] This tradition is continued by Catholic scholars such as John P. Meier, and Conleth Kearns, who also worked with Reginald C. Fuller and Leonard Johnston preparing A New Catholic Commentary on Holy Scripture.[179][180] Meier is also the author of a multi-volume work on the historical Jesus, A Marginal Jew.[181] Jewish criticism Biblical criticism posed unique difficulties for Judaism.[182] Some Jewish scholars, such as rabbinicist Solomon Schechter, did not participate in biblical criticism because they saw criticism of the Pentateuch as a threat to Jewish identity.[183]: 83 The growing anti-semitism in Germany of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, the perception that higher criticism was an entirely Protestant Christian pursuit, and the sense that many Bible critics were not impartial academics but were proponents of supersessionism, prompted Schechter to describe "Higher Criticism as Higher Anti-semitism".[183]: 42, 83 One of the earliest historical-critical Jewish scholars of Pentateuchal studies was M. M. Kalisch, who began work in the nineteenth century.[184]: 213 In the early twentieth century, historical criticism of the Pentateuch became mainstream among Jewish scholars.[184]: 218 In 1905, Rabbi David Zvi Hoffmann wrote an extensive, two-volume, philologically based critique of the Wellhausen theory, which supported Jewish orthodoxy.[185] Bible professor Benjamin D. Sommer says it is "among the most precise and detailed commentaries on the legal texts [Leviticus and Deuteronomy] ever written".[184]: 215 According to Aly Elrefaei, the strongest refutation of Wellhausen's Documentary theory came from Yehezkel Kaufmann in 1937.[186]: 8 Kaufmann was the first Jewish scholar to fully exploit higher criticism to counter Wellhausen's theory. Wellhausen's and Kaufmann's methods were similar yet their conclusions were opposed.[186]: 8 Mordechai Breuer, who branches out beyond most Jewish exegesis and explores the implications of historical criticism for multiple subjects, is an example of a twenty-first century Jewish biblical critical scholar.[184]: 267 Feminist criticism Biblical criticism impacted feminism and was impacted by it. In the 1980s, Phyllis Trible and Elisabeth Schüssler Fiorenza reframed biblical criticism by challenging the supposed disinterest and objectivity it claimed for itself and exposing how ideological-theological stances had played a critical role in interpretation.[187] For example, the patriarchal model of ancient Israel became an aspect of biblical criticism through the anthropology of the nineteenth century.[188]: 9 Feminist scholars of second-wave feminism appropriated it.[188]: 15 Third wave feminists began raising concerns about its accuracy.[188]: 24–25 Carol L. Meyers says feminist archaeology has shown "male dominance was real; but it was fragmentary, not hegemonic" leading to a change in the anthropological description of ancient Israel as heterarchy rather than patriarchy.[188]: 27 Feminist criticism is an aspect of the feminist theology movement which began in the 1960s and 1970s as part of the feminist movement in the United States.[189]: 1 Three phases of feminist biblical interpretation are connected to the three phases, or 'waves', of the movement.[188]: 11 Feminist theology has since responded to globalization, making itself less specifically Western, thereby moving beyond its original narrative "as a movement defined by the USA".[189]: 2 Feminist criticism embraces the inter-disciplinary approach to biblical criticism, encouraging a reader-response approach to the text that includes an attitude of "dissent" or "resistance".[190] Postcolonial biblical criticism In the mid to late 1990s, a global response to the changes in biblical criticism began to coalesce as "Postcolonial biblical criticism".[191]: 4, 5 Fernando F. Segovia and Stephen D. Moore postulate that it emerged from "liberation hermeneutics, or extra-biblical Postcolonial studies, or even from historical biblical criticism, or from all three sources at once".[191]: 5–6 It has a focus on the indigenous and local with an eye toward recovering those aspects of culture that Colonialism had erased or suppressed.[191]: 6 The Postcolonial view is rooted in a consciousness of the geopolitical situation for all people, and is "transhistorical and transcultural".[191]: 11 According to Laura E. Donaldson, postcolonial criticism is oppositional and "multidimensional in nature, keenly attentive to the intricacies of the colonial situation in terms of culture, race, class and gender".[191]: 12, 13 African-American biblical criticism Biblical criticism produced profound changes in African-American culture. Vaughn A. Booker writes that, "Such developments included the introduction of the varieties of American metaphysical theology in sermons and songs, liturgical modifications [to accommodate] Holy Spirit possession presences through shouting and dancing, and musical changes". These changes would both "complement and reconfigure conventional African American religious life".[192] Michael Joseph Brown writes that African Americans responded to the assumption of universality in biblical criticism by challenging it. He says all Bible readings are contextual, in that readers bring with them their own context: perceptions and experiences harvested from social and cultural situations.[37]: 2 African-American biblical criticism is based on liberation theology and black theology, and looks for what is potentially liberating in the texts.[37]: 2 Queer biblical hermeneutics According to Episcopalian priest and queer theologian Patrick S. Cheng (Episcopal Divinity School): "Queer biblical hermeneutics is a way of looking at the sacred text through the eyes of queer people. It is important to understand the meaning of these terms in relation to the exegetical process."[193] Social scientific criticism Social scientific criticism is part of the wider trend in biblical criticism to reflect interdisciplinary methods and diversity.[194][195] It grew out of form criticism's Sitz im Leben and the sense that historical form criticism had failed to adequately analyze the social and anthropological contexts which form critics claimed had formed the texts. Using the perspectives, theories, models, and research of the social sciences to determine what social norms may have influenced the growth of biblical tradition, it is similar to historical biblical criticism in its goals and methods and has less in common with literary critical approaches. It analyzes the social and cultural dimensions of the text and its environmental context.[196] New historicism New historicism emerged as traditional historical biblical criticism changed. Lois Tyson says this new form of historical criticism developed in the 1970s. It "rejects both traditional historicism's marginalization of literature and New Criticism's enshrinement of the literary text in a timeless dimension beyond history".[197]: 288 Literary texts are seen as "cultural artifacts" that reveal context as well as content, and within New Historicism, the "literary text and the historical situation" are equally important".[197]: 288 Post-modern biblical criticism Postmodern biblical criticism began after the 1940s and 1950s when the term postmodern came into use to signify a rejection of modern conventions.[198]: 73 Many of these early postmodernist views came from France following World War II. Postmodernism has been associated with Karl Marx, Sigmund Freud, radical politics, and arguments against metaphysics and ideology.[198]: 67 It questions anything that claims "objectively secured foundations, universals, metaphysics, or analytical dualism".[198]: 74 Biblical scholar A. K. M. Adam says postmodernism has three general features: 1) it denies any privileged starting point for truth; 2) it is critical of theories that attempt to explain the "totality of reality;" and 3) it attempts to show that all ideals are grounded in ideological, economic or political self-interest.[199] Post-critical interpretation Post-critical interpretation, according to Ken and Richard Soulen, "shares postmodernism's suspicion of modern claims to neutral standards of reason, but not its hostility toward theological interpretation".[4]: 22 It begins with the understanding that biblical criticism's focus on historicity produced a distinction between the meaning of what the text says and what it is about (what it historically references). The biblical scholar Hans Frei wrote that what he refers to as the "realistic narratives" of literature, including the Bible, don't allow for such separation.[200]: 119 Subject matter is identical to verbal meaning and is found in plot and nowhere else.[200]: 120 "As Frei puts it, scripture 'simultaneously depicts and renders the reality (if any) of what it talks about'; its subject matter is 'constituted by, or identical with, its narrative".[200]: 120 Notes known in German as Kultgeschichtliche Schule or Religionsgeschichtliche Schule.[4]: 161 Fiorenza says, "Christian male theologians have formulated theological concepts in terms of their own cultural experience, insisting on male language relating to God, and on a symbolic universe in which women do not appear... Feminist scholars insist that religious texts and traditions must be reinterpreted so that women and other "non-persons" can achieve full citizenship in religion and society".[65] This "leads naturally to a second indictment against biblical criticism: that it is the preserve of a small coterie of people in the rich Western world, trying to legislate for how the vast mass of humanity ought to read the Bible. ...Not only has such criticism detached the Bible from believing communities, it has also appropriated it for a particular group: namely white, male, Western scholars".[2]: 150 There is some consensus among twenty-first century textual critics that the various locations traditionally assigned to the text types are incorrect and misleading. Thus, the geographical labels should be used with caution; some scholars prefer to refer to the text types as "textual clusters" instead.[83]: 3–9 Viviano says: "While source criticism has always had its detractors, the past few decades have witnessed an escalation in the level of dissatisfaction".[32]: 52 Frank Moore Cross published Canaanite Myth and Hebrew Epic in 1973, arguing that P was not an independent coherent document but was instead an editorial expansion of the combined Jahwist/Elohist.[106]: 1–6 That was the beginning of a series of attacks on the documentary hypothesis. Hans Heinrich Schmid followed with The So-called Jahwist (1976), which questioned the date of the Jahwistic source. Martin Rose, in 1981, proposed that Jahwist was a prologue to the history which begins in Joshua, and Van Seters, in Abraham in History and Tradition, proposed a 6th-century BCE date for the Jahwist.[106]: 10–11 In 1989, Rolf Rendtorff used form criticism to show the development of the Pentateuch was opposite to the manner the Documentary hypothesis claimed.[32]: 49 He argued in The Problem of the Process of Transmission in the Pentateuch that neither the Jahwist nor the Elohist had ever existed as coherent sources and had only ever been independent fragmentary stories, poems, etc.[106]: 11 Mid-twentieth century scholars of oral tradition objected to the "book mentality" of source criticism, saying the idea that ancients had "cut and pasted" from their sources reflects the modern world more than the ancient one.[32]: 49 The presence of contradictions and repetitions doesn't necessarily prove separate sources, since they are "to be expected given the cultural background of the Old Testament and the long period of time during which the text was in formation and being passed on orally".[32]: 50 The documentary theory has been undermined by subdivisions of the sources and the addition of other sources, since: "The more sources one finds, the more tenuous the evidence for the existence of continuous documents becomes".[32]: 51 Another problem is posed by dating (see note 4[which?]). "The process of religious development is far more complex and uneven than Wellhausen imagined. Without his evolutionary assumptions, his dating of sources can no longer be accepted ... Several scholars over the past century have disagreed with Wellhausen's dates".[32]: 51 MacKenzie and Kaltner say "scholarly analysis is very much in a state of flux".[103]: 58 Don Richardson writes that Wellhausen's theory was, in part, a derivative of an anthropological theory popular in the nineteenth century known as Tylor's theory.[109]: 5 Written in 1870, Edward Burnett Tylor's theory was an evolutionary model asserting three stages of development in religion from animism to polytheism to monotheism which followed the cultural stratification that came with monarchy. Lewis M. Hopfe says: "Tylor's theories were widely accepted and regarded as classic for many years".[110] It remained the dominant theory until Wilhelm Schmidt produced a study on "native monotheism" in 1912 titled Ursprung Der Gottesidee (The Origin of the Concept of God) demonstrating the presence of monotheism in undeveloped primitive cultures.[111]: 119, 124 Tylor's theory had, in the meantime, been picked up and used in other fields beyond anthropology. Wellhausen's hypothesis, for example, depends upon the notion that polytheism preceded monotheism in Judaism's development. Hence, "Wellhausen's theology is based upon an anthropological theory which most anthropologists no longer endorse".[111]: 124 Sanders explains: 1. The form critics did not derive laws of transmission from a study of folk literature as many think. 2. They derived them by two methods: (a) by assuming that purity of form indicates antiquity, and (b) by determining how Matthew and Luke used Mark and Q, and how the later literature used the canonical gospels. 3. The first method is based on a priori considerations. 4. In so far as it depends on the use of Mark and Q by Matthew and Luke, the second is circular and therefore questionable. 5. The two are sometimes in direct conflict, although the form critics did not observe this. 6. In any case, the form critics did not derive the laws from or apply the laws to the Gospels systematically, nor did they carry out a systematic investigation of changes in the post-canonical literature.[126] Burridge says: "The analogy between the development of the gospel pericopae and folklore needed reconsideration because of developments in folklore studies: it was less easy to assume steady growth of an oral tradition in stages; significant steps were sometimes large and sudden; the length of time needed for the 'laws' of oral transmission to operate, such as the centuries of Old Testament or Homeric transmission, was greater than that taken by the gospels; even the existence of such laws was questioned... Further the transition from individual units of oral tradition into a written document had an important effect on the interpretation of the material.[128]: 13 See also:[129]: 6, 8 [130]: 277 [121]: 247 [127]: 16, 17 Tony Campbell says, "form criticism has a future "if its past is allowed a decent burial";[136]: 237 Martin Rösel writes that form criticism no longer has the high status it had in the past;[129]: 108 Erhard Blum observes problems, and he wonders if one can speak of a current form-critical method at all;[136]: 6 Bob Becking calls the question of the validity of Sitz im Leben "problematic";[129]: 253 Thomas Römer questions the assumption that form reflects any socio-historical reality;[136]: 8 Such is the question asked by Won Lee: "one wonders whether Gunkel's form criticism is still viable today".[129]: 218 reasons religion may do more harm than good It's hard to argue with some of these... By VALERIE TARICO PUBLISHED NOVEMBER 17, 2014 3:55PM (EST) (<a href='http://www.shutterstock.com/gallery-288709p1.html'>Jaroslav74</a> via <a href='http://www.shutterstock.com/'>Shutterstock</a>) (Jaroslav74 via Shutterstock) view in app save This article originally appeared on AlterNet. AlterNetMost British people think religion causes more harm than good according to a survey commissioned by the Huffington Post. Surprisingly, even among those who describe themselves as “very religious” 20 percent say that religion is harmful to society. For that we can probably thank the internet, which broadcasts everything from Isis beheadings, to stories about Catholic hospitals denying care to miscarrying women, to lists ofwild and weird religious beliefs, to articles about psychological harms from Bible-believing Christianity. In 2010, sociologist Phil Zuckerman published Society Without God: What the Least Religious Nations Can Tell Us About Contentment. Zuckerman lined up evidence that the least religious societies also tend to be the most peaceful, prosperous and equitable, with public policies that help people to flourish while decreasing both desperation and economic gluttony. We can debate whether prosperity and peace lead people to be less religious or vice versa. Indeed evidence supports the view that religion thrives on existential anxiety. But even if this is the case, there’s good reason to suspect that the connection between religion and malfunctioning societies goes both ways. Here are six ways religions make peaceful prosperity harder to achieve. Advertisement: 1. Religion promotes tribalism. Infidel, heathen, heretic. Religion divides insiders from outsiders. Rather than assuming good intentions, adherents often are taught to treat outsiders with suspicion. “Be ye not unequally yoked with unbelievers,” says the Christian Bible. “They wish that you disbelieve as they disbelieve, and then you would be equal; therefore take not to yourselves friends of them,” says the Koran (Sura 4:91). At best, teachings like these discourage or even forbid the kinds of friendship and intermarriage that help clans and tribes become part of a larger whole. At worst, outsiders are seen as enemies of God and goodness, potential agents of Satan, lacking in morality and not to be trusted. Believers might huddle together, anticipating martyrdom. When simmering tensions erupt, societies fracture along sectarian fault lines. 2. Religion anchors believers to the Iron Age. Concubines, magical incantations, chosen people, stonings . . . The Iron Age was a time of rampant superstition, ignorance, inequality, racism, misogyny, and violence. Slavery had God’s sanction. Women and children were literally possessions of men. Warlords practiced scorched earth warfare. Desperate people sacrificed animals, agricultural products, and enemy soldiers as burnt offerings intended to appease dangerous gods. Advertisement: Background Image Image Progress Bar 00:00 00:00 Volume Bar Sacred texts including the Bible, Torah and Koran all preserve and protect fragments of Iron Age culture, putting a god’s name and endorsement on some of the very worst human impulses. Any believer looking to excuse his own temper, sense of superiority, warmongering, bigotry, or planetary destruction can find validation in writings that claim to be authored by God. Today, humanity’s moral consciousness is evolving, grounded in an ever deeper and broader understanding of the Golden Rule. But many conservative believers can’t move forward. They are anchored to the Iron Age. This pits them against change in a never-ending battle that consumes public energy and slows creative problem solving. 3. Religion makes a virtue out of faith. Trust and obey for there’s no other way to be happy in Jesus. So sing children in Sunday schools across America. The Lord works in mysterious ways, pastors tell believers who have been shaken by horrors like brain cancer or a tsunami. Faith is a virtue. Advertisement: As science eats away at territory once held by religion, traditional religious beliefs require greater and greater mental defenses against threatening information. To stay strong, religion trains believers to practice self-deception, shut out contradictory evidence, and trust authorities rather than their own capacity to think. This approach seeps into other parts of life. Government, in particular, becomes a fight between competing ideologies rather than a quest to figure out practical, evidence-based solutions that promote wellbeing. 4. Religion diverts generous impulses and good intentions. Feeling sad about Haiti? Give to our mega-church. Crass financial appeals during times of crisis thankfully are not the norm, but religion does routinely redirect generosity in order to perpetuate religion itself. Generous people are encouraged to give till it hurts to promote the church itself rather than the general welfare. Each year, thousands of missionaries throw themselves into the hard work of saving souls rather than saving lives or saving our planetary life support system. Their work, tax free, gobbles up financial and human capital. Advertisement: Besides exploiting positive moral energy like kindness or generosity, religion often redirects moral disgust and indignation, attaching these emotions to arbitrary religious rules rather than questions of real harm. Orthodox Jews spend money on wigs for women and double dishwashers. Evangelical parents, forced to choose between righteousness and love, kick queer teens out onto the street. Catholic bishops impose righteous rules on operating rooms. 5. Religion teaches helplessness. Que sera, sera—what will be will be. Let go and let God.We’ve all heard these phrases, but sometimes we don’t recognize the deep relationship between religiosity and resignation. In the most conservative sects of Judaism, Christianity and Islam, women are seen as more virtuous if they let God manage their family planning. Droughts, poverty and cancer get attributed to the will of God rather than bad decisions or bad systems; believers wait for God to solve problems they could solve themselves. This attitude harms society at large as well as individuals. When today’s largest religions came into existence, ordinary people had little power to change social structures either through technological innovation or advocacy. Living well and doing good were largely personal matters. When this mentality persists, religion inspires personal piety without social responsibility. Structural problems can be ignored as long as the believer is kind to friends and family and generous to the tribal community of believers. Advertisement: 6. Religions seek power. Think corporate personhood. Religions are man-made institutions, just like for-profit corporations are. And like any corporation, to survive and grow a religion must find a way to build power and wealth and compete for market share. Hinduism, Buddhism, Christianity—any large enduring religious institution is as expert at this as Coca-cola or Chevron. And just like for-profit behemoths, they are willing to wield their power and wealth in the service of self-perpetuation, even it harms society at large. In fact, unbeknown to religious practitioners, harming society may actually be part of religion’s survival strategy. In the words of sociologist Phil Zuckerman and researcher Gregory Paul, “Not a single advanced democracy that enjoys benign, progressive socio-economic conditions retains a high level of popular religiosity.” When people feel prosperous and secure the hold of religion weakens.I distinctly remember a day in high school when a smug substitute teacher took it upon himself to demonstrate Pascal’s wager. It made me uncomfortable as it always does when religious people feel entitled to force their beliefs upon a captive, vulnerable audience. If this teacher sensed my discomfort, he ignored it and pushed on, secure in his delusion that he was doing “the lord’s work.” If you don’t know Pascal’s wager, it’s a decision matrix that demonstrates how you can make a choice in the absence of complete information. The idea is to consider the possible consequences of believing in God versus not believing, in relation to whether or not God exists. The substitute stepped back from the board to triumphantly reveal Pascal’s conclusion. If God didn’t exist, then it made no difference whether you believed in him or not. If God did exist, the consequence for not believing is eternal damnation. Therefore, the only logical choice is to believe because it offers the potential for reward with no risk of loss. I raised my hand. “Pascal is wrong, he failed to recognize that believing in God can have a catastrophic consequence on your life.” I got sent to the office. Who am I to be critical of the great Blaise Pascal? I’m the person who is right, that’s who. I genuinely think religion is bad for you Frankly, I’m pretty fed up with having my religious beliefs disrespected. Religion is one of those massive lies which demands such commitment that people won’t even engage in intellectual debate on the subject. They dismiss you like you’re a non-human. They even punish you if you dare to speak out. It’s vile, destructive, and abusive behavior. One of the many tactics of manipulating people is to present a lie as common sense indisputable truth. Nefarious forces train their hordes to not even consider an alternative. Once that is achieved, subsequent lies tend to reinforce the first lie. Breakfast When I was growing up, every single television commercial insisted that breakfast “was the most important meal of the day.” Then these commercials went on to demonstrate how sugary cereals such as Frosted Flakes were “part of a balanced breakfast.” As a kid, I was capable of figuring out that Frosted Flakes cereal probably wasn’t healthy, but I never questioned that breakfast might not be the most important meal of the day. They said that over and over and over. It turns out, it’s not true. Hold onto your flaky croissant and spicy shakshuka eggs: new Australian research has just shattered one of the most widespread food myths, integral to the diets of people of all cultures in developed countries across the globe. Despite what we’ve been told for years, breakfast is not the most important meal of the day for weight loss or to prevent the onset of hunger — Yasmin Noone, Breakfast is no longer the most important meal of the day: new study It’s pretty disgusting when a cereal company propagates a lie about nutrition in order to trick people into purchasing their product. It’s irresponsible to be dismissive about the malicious consequences of this or any lie, particularly in a country where childhood obesity is out of control Obesity now affects 1 in 5 children and adolescents in the United States — Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Overweight & Obesity However, since the United States historically values the profitability of corporations over the mental and physical health of the population, nothing will ever be done about this. The same inclination is leveraged to perpetuate the lie about the harmlessness of faith. Religion and pedophiles I find it incomprehensible how religion is allowed to exist in a blind spot even in an era of accountability and cancel culture. The myth that “religion will not harm you,” is the uncontested platform on which zealots try to force their system of indoctrination into our public schools. When somebody says, “there’s no harm to religion,” it’s important to stand up and tell them they’re wrong. Contesting them on that first point prevents them from embarking on their further agenda. Research indicates a strong link between religion and sex offenders. Those sex offenders who reported regular church attendance, a belief in supernatural punishment, and religion as important in their daily lives had more known victims, younger victims, and more convictions for sex offenses than the sex offenders who reported irregular or no church attendance and no or less intense allegiance to religious beliefs and practices — Religious Affiliations Among Adult Sexual Offenders The evidence is there and it’s certainly something that requires further examination. Perhaps the constant litany of “religion will not harm you,” has been specifically designed to protect and enable those that violently rape innocent children? We need to work against our social conditioning and make a responsible effort to combat these ongoing acts of blatant evil. Patriarchal systems Patriarchal systems in which a single individual is considered an ultimate, unquestioning authority always create a power imbalance that is often abused. A patriarchal system is fundamental to religion, and the church is responsible for perpetuating mechanisms that are exploitative to minorities and women. That’s bad. Sexually abused children realize early that their credibility is nothing compared to their aggressors’. It doesn’t matter if the parent is alcoholic, chronically unemployed, or prone to violence; in our society, an adult is almost always more believable than a child. If the parent has attained a certain measure of success in life, the credibility gap becomes a chasm — Susan Forward, Ph.D. with Craig Buck, Toxic Parents, Overcoming Their Hurtful Legacy and Reclaiming Your Life Part of the reason powerless people have no credibility “in our society” is because of the influence of religion. If you want to remove “old white men” from positions of power, it’s important to deconstruct the pillars that support them. Religion is indisputably among these. Religion reinforces the fundamental structure of injustice Many of us are trapped within a prison cell that we’ve built around ourselves. We feel a sense of rage and frustration, but our conscious mind doesn’t allow us to recognize who or what is truly responsible. However, your body knows. My mom used to grind her teeth as she slept. She ground them down to nubs and was required to make regular visits to a dental specialist. Nobody could tell what the problem was until our dad left us and the grinding stopped overnight. It’s true that you can find relief in religion, but that doesn’t mean religion still doesn’t harm you. After all, you can find relief in a bottle as well, or in drugs. Everybody has the right to stop for a moment and consider whether or not the fundamental system of belief propagated by religion is enslaving us. You’re allowed to believe that religion is harmful if you want. You’re allowed to insist that people treat that belief with respect. You’re allowed to search for the key to unlock your own prison. Anyone who says otherwise just wants to keep you under their control.Every two years the National Science Foundation produces a report, Science and Engineering Indicators, designed to probe the public’s understanding of science concepts. And every two years we relearn the sad fact that U.S. adults are less willing to accept evolution and the big bang as factual than adults in other industrial countries. Except for this time. Was there suddenly a quantum leap in U.S. science literacy? Sadly, no. Rather the National Science Board, which oversees the foundation, chose to leave the section that discussed these issues out of the 2010 edition, claiming the questions were “flawed indicators of scientific knowledge because responses conflated knowledge and beliefs.” In short, if their religious beliefs require respondents to discard scientific facts, the board doesn’t think it appropriate to expose that truth. The section does exist, however, and Science magazine obtained it. When presented with the statement “human beings, as we know them today, developed from earlier species of animals,” just 45 percent of respondents indicated “true.” Compare this figure with the affirmative percentages in Japan (78), Europe (70), China (69) and South Korea (64). Only 33 percent of Americans agreed that “the universe began with a big explosion.” ADVERTISEMENT Consider the results of a 2009 Pew Survey: 31 percent of U.S. adults believe “humans and other living things have existed in their present form since the beginning of time.” (So much for dogs, horses or H1N1 flu.) The survey’s most enlightening aspect was its categorization of responses by levels of religious activity, which suggests that the most devout are on average least willing to accept the evidence of reality. White evangelical Protestants have the highest denial rate (55 percent), closely followed by the group across all religions who attend services on average at least once a week (49 percent). I don’t know which is more dangerous, that religious beliefs force some people to choose between knowledge and myth or that pointing out how religion can purvey ignorance is taboo. To do so risks being branded as intolerant of religion. The kindly Dalai Lama, in a recent New York Times editorial, juxtaposed the statement that “radical atheists issue blanket condemnations of those who hold religious beliefs” with his censure of the extremist intolerance, murderous actions and religious hatred in the Middle East. Aside from the distinction between questioning beliefs and beheading or bombing people, the “radical atheists” in question rarely condemn individuals but rather actions and ideas that deserve to be challenged. Surprisingly, the strongest reticence to speak out often comes from those who should be most worried about silence. Last May I attended a conference on science and public policy at which a representative of the Vatican’s Pontifical Academy of Sciences gave a keynote address. When I questioned how he reconciled his own reasonable views about science with the sometimes absurd and unjust activities of the Church—from false claims about condoms and AIDS in Africa to pedophilia among the clergy—I was denounced by one speaker after another for my intolerance. Religious leaders need to be held accountable for their ideas. In my state of Arizona, Sister Margaret McBride, a senior administrator at St. Joseph’s Hospital in Phoenix, recently authorized a legal abortion to save the life of a 27-year-old mother of four who was 11 weeks pregnant and suffering from severe complications of pulmonary hypertension; she made that decision after consultation with the mother’s family, her doctors and the local ethics committee. Yet the bishop of Phoenix, Thomas Olm­sted, immediately excommunicated Sister Margaret, saying, “The mother’s life cannot be preferred over the child’s.” Ordinarily, a man who would callously let a woman die and orphan her children would be called a monster; this should not change just because he is a cleric. In the race for Alabama governor, an advertisement bankrolled by the state teachers’ union attacked candidate Bradley Byrne because he supposedly supported teaching evolution. Byrne, worried about his political future, felt it necessary to deny the charge. ADVERTISEMENT Keeping religion immune from criticism is both unwarranted and dangerous. Unless we are willing to expose religious irrationality whenever it arises, we will encourage irrational public policy and promote ignorance over education for our children.Editor’s note: For simplicity reasons, the term ‘religion’ is used here to refer only to the dominant, especially Western, dogmatic, fear-based organized religions — not the esoteric religious traditions that do have a positive impact on the world. Religion is like slow poison, and just as poison is killing your body, in the same way religion is killing your soul. There is only one difference: religion is masquerading as medicine, and while you think that it’s there for your benefit, it is secretly killing you. And before you become aware of it, religion has turned you into a lifeless being. The negative effects of religion on society are tremendous (although often unrecognized), and in this article you’re going to read the main ways religion is destroying people’s lives. So how exactly does religion negatively impact society? Let’s find out… Religion is filling people with fear Religion is one of the main reasons why people are afraid of living. When I say ‘living’ I don’t mean just surviving. To survive is one thing–even stones do that–but to live is a completely different thing. To live means to be sensitive, to discover your potential and achieve to higher states of being. The problem, however, is that the starting point of religion is fear. Religion is based on the idea of sin: all people are born sinners, impure souls, and if they don’t purify themselves, they will soon be condemned to hell by God, where they will have to experience eternal suffering. In order to avoid being thrown into hell, religion demands that people prove to God that they are worthy of heaven. How? By following the dogma of religion. Naturally, when they are put in such a situation, they find themselves in a continuous state of fear. They are always afraid of whether their actions are right according to religion or not. When you believe that you are being constantly watched by an all-seeing eye of God, you have to act in certain ways to please God. The fear of hell is always in your mind, filling you with worry and anxiety, and this does not allow you to live spontaneously. As a result, religiously indoctrinated people become neurotic and in some cases even psychotic. Religion is turning people against themselves The demands that religion places on people are unrealistic. Religion, on the one hand, teaches that people are born sinners. Sin is what we are made of, and whatever we humans are doing is bound to be corrupted in one way or another. On the other hand, however, religion is teaching people to behave in the best ways possible — in a few words, to be perfect, just like angels. But obviously people are not angels, so how can they act in such an unnatural way? This has many serious consequences. When you fail to do what God has ordered, you start hating yourself. You begin to accept the idea that you are indeed a bad person, corrupted, unworthy. And once you do so, your mind becomes filled with hatred, bitterness and resentment — a true hell on earth. Religion is turning people against each other Others are just a projection of yourself, a mirror, on whom you can see your own reflection. That’s why once you start hating yourself, you are bound to start hating others too. When you accept the idea that you are a sinner, you start seeing those around you as sinners. As a result, you fear that those you meet want to harm you — they are also evil, ill-willed, enemies of yours. In addition, you will not tolerate religious ideologies that are different from the one you hold. This is the reason why religious groups fighting against each other. Similarly, religious groups are fighting nonreligious ones. To identify with a religious ideology and call it the only truth and way, can only lead to tremendously bad or negative effects — prejudice, bigotry, and all kinds of violence (just think of how many wars have been carried out throughout history in the name of God and religion). Religion is keeping people in ignorance To live means to learn, and life is an ongoing lesson. When, however, you have grown up conditioned to believe what is right and wrong according to a religious dogma, and you’ve been taught that to doubt the religion you were born into means to go to hell, naturally you become afraid of seeking knowledge. You stop searching to find truth, and hence to educate yourself and grow as a human being. Knowledge and wisdom are incompatible with dogmatic religious ideologies. Indeed, religion is confining people’s minds in the darkness of ignorance, and those who are in search of the light of truth are being condemned by religion. This way, religion keeps people blinded by all sorts of beliefs that are not based on any factual or experiential evidence, which does wonders to stunt their intelligence. *** As you can see, the negative effects of religion on society are enormous. To blindly follow a religious or any other ideology simply means to restrict your perception, suppress your thoughts and emotions, and live in hypocrisy — in other words, to live in pain and misery. Many people choose to follow a religious dogma, even though they’re suffering from this choice, simply because religion frees them from personal responsibility. To live spontaneously one has to take responsibility for oneself, and this can be quite burdensome. Life is made up of choices, and to make the right choices isn’t always that easy. So people prefer not to chose for themselves but to have others choose for them. They prefer to walk on paths made by others, instead of creating and walking on their own paths. But unless we stop having an authority tell us what to do or what not to, we will never be free to live the way we deep down want to live. And unless we are free, we will never be happy and find peace with ourselves and the world.Editor’s note: For simplicity reasons, the term ‘religion’ is used here to refer only to the dominant, especially Western, dogmatic, fear-based organized religions — not the esoteric religious traditions that do have a positive impact on the world. Religion is like slow poison, and just as poison is killing your body, in the same way religion is killing your soul. There is only one difference: religion is masquerading as medicine, and while you think that it’s there for your benefit, it is secretly killing you. And before you become aware of it, religion has turned you into a lifeless being. The negative effects of religion on society are tremendous (although often unrecognized), and in this article you’re going to read the main ways religion is destroying people’s lives. So how exactly does religion negatively impact society? Let’s find out… Religion is filling people with fear Religion is one of the main reasons why people are afraid of living. When I say ‘living’ I don’t mean just surviving. To survive is one thing–even stones do that–but to live is a completely different thing. To live means to be sensitive, to discover your potential and achieve to higher states of being. The problem, however, is that the starting point of religion is fear. Religion is based on the idea of sin: all people are born sinners, impure souls, and if they don’t purify themselves, they will soon be condemned to hell by God, where they will have to experience eternal suffering. In order to avoid being thrown into hell, religion demands that people prove to God that they are worthy of heaven. How? By following the dogma of religion. Naturally, when they are put in such a situation, they find themselves in a continuous state of fear. They are always afraid of whether their actions are right according to religion or not. When you believe that you are being constantly watched by an all-seeing eye of God, you have to act in certain ways to please God. The fear of hell is always in your mind, filling you with worry and anxiety, and this does not allow you to live spontaneously. As a result, religiously indoctrinated people become neurotic and in some cases even psychotic. Religion is turning people against themselves The demands that religion places on people are unrealistic. Religion, on the one hand, teaches that people are born sinners. Sin is what we are made of, and whatever we humans are doing is bound to be corrupted in one way or another. On the other hand, however, religion is teaching people to behave in the best ways possible — in a few words, to be perfect, just like angels. But obviously people are not angels, so how can they act in such an unnatural way? This has many serious consequences. When you fail to do what God has ordered, you start hating yourself. You begin to accept the idea that you are indeed a bad person, corrupted, unworthy. And once you do so, your mind becomes filled with hatred, bitterness and resentment — a true hell on earth. Religion is turning people against each other Others are just a projection of yourself, a mirror, on whom you can see your own reflection. That’s why once you start hating yourself, you are bound to start hating others too. When you accept the idea that you are a sinner, you start seeing those around you as sinners. As a result, you fear that those you meet want to harm you — they are also evil, ill-willed, enemies of yours. In addition, you will not tolerate religious ideologies that are different from the one you hold. This is the reason why religious groups fighting against each other. Similarly, religious groups are fighting nonreligious ones. To identify with a religious ideology and call it the only truth and way, can only lead to tremendously bad or negative effects — prejudice, bigotry, and all kinds of violence (just think of how many wars have been carried out throughout history in the name of God and religion). Religion is keeping people in ignorance To live means to learn, and life is an ongoing lesson. When, however, you have grown up conditioned to believe what is right and wrong according to a religious dogma, and you’ve been taught that to doubt the religion you were born into means to go to hell, naturally you become afraid of seeking knowledge. You stop searching to find truth, and hence to educate yourself and grow as a human being. Knowledge and wisdom are incompatible with dogmatic religious ideologies. Indeed, religion is confining people’s minds in the darkness of ignorance, and those who are in search of the light of truth are being condemned by religion. This way, religion keeps people blinded by all sorts of beliefs that are not based on any factual or experiential evidence, which does wonders to stunt their intelligence. *** As you can see, the negative effects of religion on society are enormous. To blindly follow a religious or any other ideology simply means to restrict your perception, suppress your thoughts and emotions, and live in hypocrisy — in other words, to live in pain and misery. Many people choose to follow a religious dogma, even though they’re suffering from this choice, simply because religion frees them from personal responsibility. To live spontaneously one has to take responsibility for oneself, and this can be quite burdensome. Life is made up of choices, and to make the right choices isn’t always that easy. So people prefer not to chose for themselves but to have others choose for them. They prefer to walk on paths made by others, instead of creating and walking on their own paths. But unless we stop having an authority tell us what to do or what not to, we will never be free to live the way we deep down want to live. And unless we are free, we will never be happy and find peace with ourselves and the world.This week marks the beginning of the holiest period of the year for roughly 14 million Jews across the globe. As they celebrate the holiday of Rosh Hashanah, they begin looking back on the past twelve months through the lens of their faith, counting their blessings and asking forgiveness for their mistakes. For believers, it is a time of psychological and spiritual introspection, renewal, and growth. As we approached this momentous holiday, a rabbi recently shared with me his conviction that religion can be one of the most powerful forces for good in individuals’ lives. “It offers us the opportunity to be better, happier, healthier people,” he asserted. “We shouldn’t forget that.” Indeed, few forces have historically been more powerful than religion in shaping people’s existences. According to the latest poll by the Pew Research Center, 77 percent of Americans say that religion is at least somewhat important in their lives and 83 percent say they’re fairly certain that God or a higher power exists. But not everyone agrees that religion is good for us. There has long been a debate among scholars about this issue, with some claiming that it facilitates well-being and others claiming that it leads to neurosis. In fact, there are few issues in the field of psychology as highly researched as this question. It isn’t an easy question to answer, however. One stumbling block is that religion means vastly different things to different people. Even the meaning of the word “religion” has changed over the past few decades. You might be surprised to know, for instance, that the distinction between religion and spirituality is a relatively new one, emerging only in the latter half of the twentieth century. It has become increasingly common to hear people say they are “spiritual” but not “religious,” with approximately one in four adults in the United States now identifying as such. But some have cautioned against making too much of this distinction. Researcher Kenneth Pargament has pointed out that, for many people, religion and spirituality can’t easily be separated. Although someone participating in a religious service certainly is partaking in organized religion, he or she may simultaneously undergo a very personal spiritual experience inspired by the sermon, music, or beauty of the building. Because of this difficulty teasing things apart, most psychological research on religion includes spirituality in the mix. Literally thousands of studies have now investigated the relationship between religion and well-being. Lucky for us, in 2015, Duke University professor of psychiatry Harold Koenig and his research team carefully reviewed more than 3,000 studies published prior to that time. A total of 79 percent of relevant studies showed a link between religion/spirituality and psychological well-being. A majority also demonstrated a relationship with physical well-being. In fact, one of the most widely celebrated findings is that religion and spiritualty are related to longer life. About 68 percent of published studies on that topic have found a link. In one study, researchers followed 8,450 people between the ages of 40 and 90+ for more than 8 years, noting those who passed away of any cause. The results revealed an 18 percent reduction in the risk of dying during this period for people who attended church services once per week, and a 30 percent reduction for those attending more than once per week—numbers approaching the power of regular moderate physical exercise. article continues after advertisement We should be very careful how we interpret these findings, however. Although it’s clear that relationships exist between religion and spirituality and both psychological and physical well-being, it isn’t clear exactly why they exist. That’s because religion is a complex, multi-faceted phenomenon that can influence people in many ways. Here are three of the most important reasons that researchers believe religion and spirituality may be good for us: Reason #1: Better Health Habits Many religions encourage people to take care of their bodies and minds. The New Testament, for instance, calls the human body a “temple of the Holy Spirit,” encouraging followers to be good stewards of their physical selves. In the Hindu faith, the practice of Ayurveda specifies particular ways to care for one’s health, including eating certain foods and avoiding others. Perhaps because of such teachings, a number of studies have shown that religiousness is associated with better general health habits, including lower rates of smoking and alcohol consumption as well as a greater likelihood of undergoing regular medical screenings. Reason #2: Enhanced Coping The ways that people cope with stress may also account for the relationship of religion and spirituality with well-being. When we encounter problems in our lives, researchers have observed that people can use religion to cope in both healthy and unhealthy ways. Positive religious coping consists of strategies that reflect a trusting relationship with God and a sense of spiritual connectedness to others, including reframing stressful events as reflecting the work of a benevolent God and seeing oneself as collaborating with God to solve problems, among others. It’s important to note, however, that not everyone who considers themselves to be religious or spiritual practices healthy coping. People also can experience spiritual discontentment, religious conflict, or come to believe that negative events are punishments from God—experiences that work against the ability to cope. article continues after advertisement Reason #3: Social Support A final important way that spirituality and religion may impact well-being is through social and emotional support. The word fellowship is often associated with Christian communities, while the words havurah (from the Hebrew for “friendship”) and sangha (Pali for “community”) are used in similar ways by Jews and Buddhists. Many religious institutions run support groups for people coping with emotional and physical difficulties, provide personnel to visit the sick and their families, or offer food and other resources to individuals with low incomes. Although religious groups are hardly the only sources of support in people’s lives, for believers, they can be important ones. Despite the research connecting religion with well-being, it’s important to avoid concluding that people who consider themselves atheist and agnostic can’t be just as healthy and happy as those who are religious. All three of the factors just mentioned can be present in non-religious people's lives in plentiful quantities. Non-believers can and often do take excellent care of themselves, cope well with stress, and engage in loving and supportive relationships. It’s also important to realize that religion and spirituality aren’t always associated with greater well-being. People who experience struggles with their religious and spiritual beliefs often experience greater anxiety, depression, and other forms of lowered psychological well-being. In addition, although people who believe in a forgiving God tend to forgive themselves when they make mistakes, those who believe in a less forgiving God deal with themselves more harshly. In one study, researchers even found that when HIV-positive men believed in a merciful and forgiving God, they experienced significantly slower disease-progression, but when they believed that God was harsh, judgmental, and punishing, their disease actually ended up progressing faster. The particular ideals of a religious or spiritual system really matter. So as much as it’s tempting to buy into oversimplifications like, “religion is good,” real life isn’t so clear. Although the research shows that religion and spirituality are often helpful, we should be open to the idea that specific aspects of religion may be good or bad for our health under different circumstances. Any complete understanding of human psychology can’t overlook the many ways that religion can impact its believers. As the rabbi expressed, research shows that religion certainly can be a powerful force for good in people’s lives. But, just like anything powerful, understanding it as fully as possible—both for better and for worse—is the real fundamental good. When I was hired as a staff chaplain at a state mental hospital, I did not know how best to minister to the spiritual needs of our patients. My prior experience was largely end-of-life and crisis ministry at acute care hospitals and in hospice settings. But as a mental health chaplain, I found that my clients were suffering, but for the most part not from physical pain. I saw that they were frequently in acute spiritual distress, and that their spiritual needs were often closely linked with their mental illness. vision-logo-nov-dec-2016 The hospital where I work has an average patient census just short of 300, and it serves a vast area encompassing most of south and southwest Texas. Nearly half are forensic patients, either “NGRI” (not guilty by reason of insanity) or coming from jail to gain mental competency to stand trial for their offences. Their crimes may range from simple trespassing to homicide. Other patients are short-term or longer-term acute, geriatric, or residential patients from the community at large. About 10 percent are adolescents. I am the sole chaplain for the facility. The National Institute of Mental Health estimates that 1 out of every 4 adults will experience some form of mental illness in their lifetime; likewise approximately 10 percent of children and adolescents. Stigma and shame often prevent persons from seeking treatment or asking for help. This can be especially true for those who consider themselves deeply religious. It is not helpful to try to talk a person with mental illness out of a particular delusion by using logic, reason, or theology, and in my opinion it could even violate the chaplain’s role. Many of our patients return again and again (often within months or even days after discharge) largely due to inadequate support in the community. Often they are homeless with no family support system and few friends; some struggle with substance abuse in addition to their mental illness. For them, the hospital has become a “safe place” where they can reconnect with people they trust and have known for years. It is both home and sanctuary. In south Texas, a majority of the population is Catholic, primarily Hispanic. A sizable minority comes from fundamentalist/evangelical Protestant backgrounds. Almost all are inactive in their church or faith group, although frequently they grew up in devout families. Many read Scripture regularly, however, and tend to interpret it quite literally, sometimes becoming fixated on certain problematic themes, which can become psychologically unhealthy. I call this “toxic religion” or “bad theology” (and yes, I realize this must come across as a value judgment). Much of my work here is gently coaxing these patients back to a more positive religious perspective, by offering “spiritual wellness” groups and individual pastoral counseling. Some patients may present as hyper-religious, with religious delusions dominating their entire world view. Sometimes problematic religious themes feed into their mental illness and vice versa. Individuals with major depression or bipolar illness sometimes exhibit an overwhelming concern with sinfulness and guilt. They can even feel that they deserve to die for past offenses or bad choices, leading to suicidal ideation. They may believe that God (or the devil) is punishing them, or that everything is predestined and therefore hopeless. Sometimes they will refuse medications because they are convinced God will heal them if their faith is strong enough — or conversely that God’s will is for them to suffer, and therefore taking medication is a rebellion against God. Psychotic and delusional patients with schizophrenia seem to be especially fascinated by prophetic scriptures concerning the end of days, especially Revelation, but also Isaiah, Daniel, and Jeremiah. For many, the end times are imminent. Some believe they are Satan, the Antichrist, or “666” himself; others, one of the archangels, Jesus Christ returned, or the Prophet Mohammed. They may insist on seeing a priest for an exorcism, or ask for a curandero (traditional healer) to do a ritual cleansing of their room to remove demonic powers or evil spirits. Some have auditory or visual hallucinations in which they are convinced that evil spirits or demons have cast spells or cursed them or are commanding them to do evil things. They may believe that others, especially family members, are demon-possessed. Some have acted upon these delusions and committed various offenses, even murder. They may have chosen to embrace their delusions to avoid taking personal responsibility, but I try not to psychoanalyze them. It is important that a chaplain respect their present state of mind and needs, including their religious delusions, neither confronting nor validating them. I do pass on relevant information that might be helpful to their treatment team, without violating pastoral confidentiality. Sometimes this can be a delicate ethical tightrope to tread. Meeting the person “where they are” is particularly important when working with the mentally ill. It is essential to recognize that for a person with mental illness, this is their reality. I always try to see the person, not the diagnosis, and remember that they may have mental illness but they are not stupid. Many are incredibly intelligent and perceptive, and bristle at words or tones of voice that come across as patronizing or condescending. To avoid being unduly influenced by a person’s specific diagnosis or legal circumstances, I tend to review other practitioners’ chart notes after visiting the patient rather than before. It is not helpful to try to talk a person with mental illness out of a particular delusion by using logic, reason, or theology, and in my opinion it could even violate the chaplain’s role. A non-judgmental presence and active listening can establish a much better pastoral relationship than talk ministry. For this reason I try to focus on spirituality rather than religion per se, to “walk with” that person as they seek their own path to spiritual wholeness and healing. My personal conviction that a given religious belief is “toxic” or “bad” theology does not give me the right to evangelize against it. As a person moves beyond crisis to wellness, they often discover for themselves how certain deeply held religious beliefs are working against their recovery, and they realize a deeper and more positive spirituality. Our job as mental health chaplains is to reflect God’s unconditional love and to support the patient’s spiritual journey, no matter how troubled, as companion and gentle guide. Donna Dickerson, BCC, is a chaplain at San Antonio State Hospital in San Antonio, TX. For further reading These observations are largely subjective, based on five years of personal experience. I encourage others to research these observations in hopes of furthering our understanding of the complex inter-relationship of mental illness and unhelpful religious belief systems. Some existing publications of interest include: Significance of the Chaplain within The Mental Health Care Team, Psychiatric Bulletin 2002. Confidentiality and Mental Health/Chaplaincy Collaboration, University of Nebraska Public Policy Center, 2014. The Chaplain as a Voice and Bridge for Mental Health Patients, PlainViews, 2014.After Elisha watched Elijah ascend into heaven, the prophet went to the city of Jericho and performed his first miracle. The men of that city faced an environmental crisis: Their water was toxic, most likely because of the sulphur and other chemicals that had rained down upon nearby Sodom and Gomorrah years earlier. This poison had made the land barren (see 2 Kings 2:19-22) and it was probably affecting people and animals as well as plant life. So Elisha performed a bold, prophetic act. He threw salt in the water and proclaimed: “Thus says the Lord, ‘I have purified these waters; there shall not be from there death or unfruitfulness any longer” (NASB). His proclamation brought immediate cleansing. This obscure story in the Old Testament offers us a picture of the gospel’s power. The message of Jesus Christ heals us. The Holy Spirit brings life where death has reigned. He neutralizes the poisons that cause spiritual barrenness. He balances the pH level so that spiritual growth and vitality is possible. All of us would like to enjoy a healthy spiritual life. But the sad truth is that many of us, and many churches today, are barren because of hazardous additives. We have believed a different gospel—one laced with legalism, performance-based religion and salvation by works—when Christ alone is our only source of life. Jesus Himself referred to these toxins as “the leaven of the Pharisees” (Luke 12:1). He told us that the Pharisees’ brand of religion, which looked good on the outside, was deadly—and contagious. Have you been infected? You can take your own pH test by examining these eight characteristics of a religious spirit. A religious spirit views God as a cold, harsh, distant taskmaster rather than an approachable, loving Father. When we base our relationship with God on our ability to perform spiritual duties, we deny the power of grace. God does not love us because we pray, read our Bibles, attend church or witness, yet millions of Christians think God is mad if they don’t perform these and other duties perfectly. As a result they struggle to find true intimacy with Jesus. A religious spirit places emphasis on doing outward things to show others that God accepts him. We deceive ourselves into believing that we can win God’s approval through a religious dress code, certain spiritual disciplines, particular music styles or even doctrinal positions. A religious spirit develops traditions and formulas to accomplish spiritual goals. We trust in our liturgies, denominational policies or man-made programs to obtain results that only God alone can give. A religious spirit becomes joyless, cynical and hypercritical. This can turn a home or a church completely sour. Then, whenever genuine joy and love are expressed, this becomes a threat to those who have lost the simplicity of true faith. A religious spirit becomes prideful and isolated, thinking that his righteousness is special and that he cannot associate with other believers who have different standards. Churches that allow these attitudes become elitist—and dangerously vulnerable to deception or cult-like practices. A religious spirit develops a harsh, judgmental attitude toward sinners, yet those who ingest this poison typically struggle with sinful habits that they cannot admit to anyone else. Religious people rarely interact with nonbelievers because they don’t want their own superior morals to be tainted by them. A religious spirit rejects progressive revelation and refuses to embrace change. This is why many churches become irrelevant to society. They become so focused on what God did 50 years ago that they become stuck in a time warp—and cannot move forward when the Holy Spirit begins to speak in new ways. When religious groups refuse to shift with God’s new directives, they become “old wineskins” and God must find more flexible vessels that are willing to implement His changes. A religious spirit persecutes those who disagree with his self-righteous views and becomes angry whenever the message of grace threatens to undermine his religiosity. An angry religious person will use gossip and slander to assassinate other peoples’ character and may even use violence to prove his point. Jesus, in fact, warned His disciples: “There will even come a time when anyone who kills you will think he’s doing God a favor” (John 16:2, The Message). If the poison of religion has seeped into your life, ask Him today to pour a fresh understanding of His grace into your barren spirit Toxic Theology: Religious Beliefs that Hurt Instead of Heal by Rev. Dr. Terri Daniel on June 9, 2018 | 8 Comments 60 In October 2015 a television news crew covered the story of a ten year-old boy named Kyler Bradley who was diagnosed with inoperable brain cancer. The crew filmed Kyler in his classroom surrounded by his friends, while the teacher instructed the children to “pray for a miracle.” The reporter said: “Kyler believes in miracles. So do his classmates. Their teacher planted that idea when she told 30 ten year-olds about Kyler’s cancer.” One of the children was quoted as saying, “If everybody prays for him, God will listen.” Kyler died six months later, and when I shared this story with the educators and counselors in my professional network, there was heated discussion about the teacher’s decision to use prayer as a coping strategy for her students. We wondered how the parents of those children dealt with the inevitable question, “Why didn’t God listen?” Events like this create fertile ground for conflict between religious belief and reality. Not only did those children have to grieve the loss of their friend, they were also prompted by the teacher’s insistence on prayer to grapple with complex theological questions. In a similar scenario, while facilitating a grief group for adolescents, I overheard this conversation between two boys who had recently lost their fathers: Matthew: I don’t understand how anybody could go to Heaven. There are too many rules. My dad didn’t believe in God. Does that mean he didn’t go to Heaven? Justin: Well, God forgives everybody, right? So everybody goes to Heaven. Another boy in the same group, Taylor, told the story of his mother taking her own life. He’d heard that suicide was a sin, and worried about where she would spend eternity. One of my seminary professors, Dr. Daniel Schipani, reminds us that many of the toxic religious beliefs we recognize today are rooted in the Abrahamic faith traditions. He identifies some of the key features of those beliefs as follows: . They include forms of emotional, spiritual, moral and sometimes physical or sexual violence and power abuse. . They compromise emotional/mental health, and are connected to mental/emotional dysfunction. . They exist on a spectrum of intensity ranging from unhealthy to harmful to lethal. Although the examples of the children given above do not constitute abuse or necessarily lead to mental dysfunction, they could certainly characterize the unhealthy end of Schipani’s spectrum, depending on how the children’s questions were answered by their families, churches or communities. If Matthew’s evangelical grandmother insisted that his father didn’t go to heaven because he wasn’t saved, or if someone told Taylor that his mother went to hell for suicide, the seeds of toxic theology would be firmly planted. Fr. Matthew Fox spent 34 years in the Catholic Dominican order before being expelled for questioning the doctrine of original sin. Today he is a leading voice in a movement for making Christianity more progressive, more inclusive and more relevant to contemporary life. Fox suggests that we replace the idea of original sin with a more life-affirming, less-threatening concept called original blessing. He poses a profound question… how is religion to be an agent of transformation if religion itself is not transformed? Religious traditions can be toxic when they place allegiance to beliefs and doctrines above personal spiritual experience. Many of today’s theologians are questioning those beliefs and doctrines, and their responses seem to point to two distinct schools of thought. On one side, traditional Christians struggle to make sense of doctrines, while on the other, doctrines are rejected entirely to make room for a new form of Christianity. Square Pegs in Round Holes: Trying to Make Sense of Toxic Doctrines In his book Love, Violence and The Cross, Dr. Gregory Love critiques the doctrine of substitutionary atonement while at the same time lamenting its loss from contemporary Christianity. He states, “Today the Christian church is losing this center, and with it, the good news that the end of divine-human estrangement… has been accomplished in the work of Jesus.” He identifies this work as the “central Christian assertion,” but also points out its many flaws, including how the theory of substitutionary atonement justifies abuse and violence by glorifying the suffering of the innocent. He grapples mightily with this doctrine in a precarious balancing act in which he attempts to remain faithful to the teachings of the church while questioning the validity of its central assertion. Pastor and media darling Rob Bell also takes aim at major teachings, in particular, the notion of eternal damnation in hell and the image of God as a cruel punisher. In his book Love Wins, he points out that the concept of hell in the afterlife isn’t biblical, and also says that the image of God as a violent taskmaster is “psychologically crushing.” But despite his willingness to deconstruct these beliefs, he still maintains that Jesus is the only path to God. He tells us that because Jesus is one with God, we can be one with God too, by going through Jesus as a conduit. In Bell’s words, this will allow God to “rescue us from death, sin and destruction.” Although they both attempt to offer a critical analysis, Bell and Love end up bringing us right back to where we started… a theology that characterizes humanity as innately flawed and in need of rescue. Dr. Love validates this view when he says, “God could quite justly have abandoned us to our fate. He could have left us alone to reap the fruit of our wrongdoing and to perish in our sins. It is what we deserved . But he did not. Because he loved us, he came after us in Christ. He pursued us even to the desolate anguish of the cross , where he bore our sin, guilt, judgment and death.” Bell and Love are both passionate about the dangers of doctrines like eternal damnation and substitutionary atonement, but they are still referring to a humanized image of God as a father figure who acts as either a loving rescuer or a cruel judge. This is not an image that supports progressive theology. Trying to match doctrine and dogma with lived human experience is like trying to put a square peg into a round hole. The square peg is a belief in divine reward and punishment. The round hole is the way life actually works. By the time most of us are young adults we have observed that the good are not necessarily rewarded and the bad are not necessarily punished. Real human experience proves that it just doesn’t work that way. So the only way the emerging church could sell the idea of divine reward or punishment was to locate it in the afterlife, where it could not be verified or validated. The Other Side of the Coin: Rejecting Toxic Doctrines Matthew Fox describes our current understanding of Christianity as “a religious tradition that begins with sin and centers almost exclusively around redemption from sin.” A good deal of this tradition can be attributed to Jonathan Edwards’ notorious 18th century sermon, Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God, which depicts humanity as abhorred by God, dangling over glowing flames in the pit of hell, and “worthy of nothing more than to be cast to the fire.” Fox proposes a more positive understanding of sin by defining it as any action that causes harm to creation and disrupts harmony. He offers a reasonable alternative to the idea of salvation; instead of striving for an unattainable perfection and dividing the world into saved vs. unsaved, we can rise to the understanding that all experience is holy, and we can see God’s presence as much in suffering as we can in joy. We can learn to view ourselves as part of an original blessing rather than an original sin. The blessing is our ability to learn and grow… our free will, our expanding awareness, our curiosity about the meaning of our existence, and our eagerness to embark on a spiritual quest (the very things Adam and Eve were punished for). Imagine how different our spiritual lives might be if we saw Adam and Eve’s burgeoning self-awareness as a step in the evolution of human consciousness rather than an error or an act of disobedience. Instead of wrestling endlessly with doctrines and notions that are difficult to understand and even more difficult to apply to daily living, why not start by rejecting those notions entirely? Episcopal bishop John Shelby Spong does not hesitate to insist that “The idea of Jesus dying for your sins has to go.” He explains that seeing Jesus as a rescuer is a form of magical thinking that allows the church to make guilt a necessary step toward conversion. Spong suggests that moving theism aside would free us to explore spirituality in new ways, perhaps by learning to think of God as a “what” instead of a “who.” That statement always reminds me of a conversation I had with a grief counseling client who struggled with her Christian faith after the death of her young child. She wondered why her loving Father in Heaven would allow such a terrible thing to happen. When I suggested that it might help to think of God as an “it” rather than a “who,” she was enraged, and told me that God would punish me for calling him an “it.” Perhaps the problem is simply about semantics. If we remove original sin from the equation, a Christian’s definition of salvation might be similar to a Buddhist’s definition of transcendence. Either way, the goal is to elevate our understanding of what we are and our relationship to the unseen cosmic forces around us. The need for salvation implies that something’s wrong; that we are not where we should be, and we need to be rescued. The common Christian understanding is that we are in this condition because of original sin. If we remove original sin from the mix when trying to understand what salvation actually means, we are left with the awareness that “sin” may simply refer to our sense of separation from the divine, and as such, it is something we can heal from within. Spong reminds us that Buddhists do not attribute their experience of transcendence to a supernatural deity. It is understood that the state of transcendence is natural for humanity because of our innate divinity, and there is no need for the intercession of a third-party or an anthropomorphized God. Spong cites these words from his personal teacher Paul Tillich: “We must abandon the external height images in which the theistic God has historically been perceived, and replace them with internal depth images of a deity who is not apart from us, but who is the very core and ground of all that is.” Visit Terri Daniel’s website: Afterlife Conference References Bell, Rob. Love Wins: A Book About Heaven, Hell, and the Fate of Every Person Who Ever Lived. Reprint edition. New York: HarperOne, 2012. Fox, Matthew. Original Blessing: A Primer in Creation Spirituality: Presented in Four Paths, Twenty-six Themes, and Two Questions. New York: Jeremy P. Tarcher/Putnam, 2000. Jones, Hannah J. “Community & Strength: 10-year-old Believes in Miracles,” WKRC, October 28, 2015, http://local12.com/news/local/community–strength-10-year-old-believes-in-miracles. Love, Gregory Anderson. Love, Violence, and the Cross: How the Nonviolent God Saves Us through the Cross of Christ. Cascade Books, an imprint of Wipf and Stock Publishers, 2010. Schipani, Daniel. “The Way, the Truth, and the Life”?: Understanding Healthy & Harmful Spirituality” (Power Point Presentation presented at the Faith and Caregiving Across the Lifespan, San Francisco Theological Seminary, July 13, 2017. Spong, John Shelby. Why Christianity Must Change or Die: A Bishop Speaks to Believers In Exile. Reprint edition. San Francisco, Calif.: HarperOne, 1999. Zakai, Avihu. “The Ideological Context of Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God.” Fides et historia 36, no. 2 (September 2004): 1–18.John Pavlovitz is a former pastor and a current commentator on the state of religion and the church in America today. He is a former pastor because several years ago he was fired by his church for his “provocative” writing. He remains provocative today, with his blog, “Stuff That Needs to Be Said,” surpassing 100 million total page views. In recent years, as increasing numbers of Christian evangelicals have embraced Donald Trump and Trump-ism, Pavlovitz hasn’t held back, insisting that the evangelical, conservative church and its form of Christianity, have become toxic beyond repair, indeed have become “antithetical to Jesus.” In this words, “I cannot align myself with the human rights violations and overt racism and rabid nationalism that is defining Christianity in America today. If being a Christian now means such things, count me out!” He laments that the evangelical church features, “homophobic politicians and Muslim-hating celebrity evangelists ... with gun-toting preachers and damnation wielding social media trolls and predatory presidents ... This monstrosity claiming to be of Jesus would be unrecognizable to him.” C’mon, John say what you really mean! It is always easy to appreciate someone who so clearly expresses what you believe. So I confess I resonate with his searing and fearless critique of those self-proclaimed Christians who love, support and seemingly worship Donald Trump and all things Trump, including the racism, lies, intolerance and downright cruelty. How they reconcile Trumpism and the Gospel of Jesus is a mystery to me. advertisement The one issue I have with Pavlovitz and his critique is that he seems to conflate it with American Christianity in general. It can sound like he views all forms of institutional religion as rather toxic, a position I suspect that many in the West County would agree with. In his words, “God has left the building and maybe you need to as well.” As a Christian pastor myself, I may be a bit defensive here, but I don’t believe you can place all forms of religious expression into the same “toxics only” bucket. I would argue that it is possible – and necessary - to distinguish good religion from bad – good churches from bad. During my long ministry in Sebastopol, I was told more than once, “You Christians and your churches are all the same.” But that simply is not true. Yes, I agree with Pavlovitz and critics like him that bad religion can produce bigots, fanatics, hypocrites and narrow-minded, self-righteous and intolerant persons. They are all around us, many seemingly in Congress. Ah, but religion has also produced people like Desmond Tutu, Martin Luther King, Jr., Albert Schweitzer, Michelle and Barack Obama, Dorothy Day, and even Jackie Robinson and Aretha Franklin. Their example and the examples of many other people of faith, and not just the Christian faith, tell us that it is possible for religion to be open and growing and sensitive and curious, not confining the human spirit but enlarging it. Consider ... what seems to have gotten Jesus in the most trouble was his habit of inviting absolutely anyone to join him for dinner. His faith was one of extravagant love and welcome and inclusiveness. He constantly urged his followers to savor beauty, practice truth, advance community and respond in compassion. Quite a contrast to the angry, fearful and intolerant expressions of religious faith we see these days. Good religion always points beyond itself, lifts itself above trivial and petty rules and regulations and makes itself a servant of human need. It is not hurtful or toxic, instead remaining open and curious and concerned for the human condition everywhere. Says Pavlovitz, “Faith shouldn’t make you a jerk!” If religion is not producing loving, concerned and compassionate people, then yes, God has already left the building and so should we. Chrissy Stroop: When I first approached Lauren with the idea, it seemed to me that capturing this moment of major generational conflict and shift around religion and identity would be a valuable thing to do. We began working on the project in the summer of 2016, and by fall the religiously unaffiliated, or “nones,” had exceeded a fifth of the U.S. population, with sociologists having linked the rapid growth of this demographic to the Christian Right’s culture wars. Empty the Pews: Stories of Leaving the Church Chrissy Stroop and Lauren O’Neal Epiphany Publishing November 29, 2019 Lauren and I both believed that it would be good for the “chattering classes” not just to be talking about the nones, but to give us a seat at the table. And we believed that having a talented and diverse group of writers craft powerful personal essays about surviving authoritarian and abusive Christian Right upbringings could be a way to tell the world that we are not just statistics, that we have voices that deserve to be heard. Lauren O’Neal: I would say the genesis of the project goes back even further than that. When Chrissy and I first met, one of the first things we bonded over was having left the faiths we grew up in (although we were probably both at pretty different points in that process than we are now, over ten years later). I think we were both struck by how our stories were completely different yet were similar in so many ways, which of course makes you think about what you’d find if you juxtaposed a whole bunch more stories with each other. We started saying, “One day we should do an anthology on this” in, like, 2012! And it took this long to actually make it happen. Chrissy: Ha, yeah, back in grad school I used to tell people that my “hobby” was having existential crises. What’s the most important take-home message for readers at this cultural moment? Chrissy: The way I see it, there are two major take-home messages of the collection apart from its strictly artistic merits, of which, if I do say so myself, there are many, thanks to the incredible pool of talent we ultimately drew on and also to Lauren’s excellent editorial skills. Firstly, we want people who grew up or are growing up in right-wing Christian environments to understand that it’s okay to trust their doubts, to break away and move toward healing, that there are other possibilities out there. They’re not alone. Secondly, there’s still a pretty strong taboo in the American public sphere against criticizing any large Christian group that we hope this book will help smash. The press tends to coddle conservative, mostly white evangelicals, and to some extent radical traditionalist Catholics and Mormons, much to the detriment of our democracy. The Christian Right is, after all, Trump’s base, and as a bloc they represent the single greatest threat to democracy and human rights in the United States. Lauren: I second all that and would just add that I want readers to know that all different kinds of experiences and stories are valid. It’s great that people have beautiful experiences with religion, but stories like ours are valid too. I mostly had in mind fellow leavers of toxic Christianity and American liberals who need to get a clue about how serious a threat authoritarian Christians represent to democracy. Is there anything you had to leave out? Chrissy: By and large, not really. We passed on some strong essays in order to focus primarily on leavers who ended up as atheists or agnostics, rather than [on those who chose] a healthier spiritual or religious path. Lauren: Similarly, to keep the scope of the book manageable, we focused on American stories, which meant we couldn’t include as many international perspectives as we wanted. What are some of the biggest misconceptions about your topic? Lauren: I think one of the biggest misconceptions is that people who leave the church are just angry and bitter, and that any critiques of Christianity are just kind of sour grapes. I think you’ll find justified anger in some of these essays, but I think you’ll also find they’re written not from a place of bitterness but from some measure of peace. You can’t write a good essay about something in your life until you’ve had time to come to terms with it and move on from it. Even the contributors that experienced the worst forms of trauma and abuse have come far enough to share something really vulnerable about themselves with the whole world. That’s strength and courage, not bitterness. Chrissy: I absolutely agree with Lauren here; the late Rachel Held Evans, who did so much to shake up conservative Christian subculture and who left us too soon, also emphasized writing from our scars rather than our wounds. It’s an important insight, and it took me twenty years to write a confessional essay about my experiences on short-term mission trips in Russia and how they contributed to my loss of faith. In terms of misconceptions, one that’s related to Lauren’s comments about “bitterness” is the widespread notion that Christianity, and maybe all “real” religion, is inherently benign. The truth is that some religion wounds. Some religion kills. Some religion absolutely destroys people who cannot be accommodated or contained within a rigid fundamentalist, and frankly white supremacist patriarchal, ideologically driven community. It is absolutely inaccurate and unhelpful to sweep this problem away by calling toxic Christians “fake Christians,” which is unfortunately a popular take among liberals. In fact, it’s not just inaccurate and unhelpful; it’s also an insult to survivors of toxic religion. On the whole, despite the powerful and important interventions of #MeToo and #ChurchToo, our culture still accommodates abusers more than it does victims and survivors. I hope this books helps to change that. Did you have a specific audience in mind when writing? Lauren: I cohost a podcast called Sunday School Dropouts in which I (an ex-Christian) and my husband (a nonbelieving sort of Jew) read through the Bible. Over time, that podcast has grown a much bigger and more diverse audience than I expected. There are people like me who have left their faith, people who don’t really know anything about religion and want to learn, and—most surprising to me—people who follow more progressive forms of Christianity. I had all those audiences in mind while working on this book, plus, perhaps above all, people who are currently questioning or deconstructing their faith; I want them to know that other paths are possible. Chrissy: When I started out working on this book with Lauren, I mostly had in mind fellow leavers of toxic Christianity and American liberals who need to get a clue about how serious a threat authoritarian Christians represent to democracy. I will be glad if we do reach a wider audience than that, and the book should also appeal to those who are curious about current social dynamics. I could see the collection being assigned as a primary source in a religious studies course. Are you hoping to just inform readers? Entertain them? Piss them off? Chrissy: Um, all of the above? I’m really good at pissing off Christians in particular; just check out my Twitter. On a more serious note, much of the book is heavy, but there are lighter and humorous moments. I think the final product is a profoundly human sort of impressionistic generational portrait that is by turns informative, artistic, and likely to induce anger. We should be angry, after all, about the oppression and abuses that right-wing Christians inflict on their children and, when they can, the rest of American society. And you can be sure some Christians will be pissed off by the book’s mere existence. Lauren: Hahaha, I would say more like none of the above! To me, the primary purpose is just to offer a connection with another human’s story. I see the point of a personal essay as something like getting to see the inside of another person’s head for a while, and the emotional and intellectual experience that entails. If it’s informative and entertaining on top of that, all the better. (This is why I needed Chrissy as a coeditor! Otherwise I would just be like, “Isn’t the literary power of a well-crafted essay the main thing people are looking for in a book?”) Chrissy: Heh, we needed each other! I have a Ph.D. in history and have been learning to write in non-academic genres over the last five years or so, but if I’d done this book without Lauren, I’d have gotten bogged down in statistics, context, and the academic-ish apparatus. Lauren helped me considerably in crafting my contribution so that the final version was a true personal essay, written in the appropriate style, even if it is one informed by history and sociology. We were also able to reach out to overlapping but distinct networks to bring particular people on to the project. It is what it is because of the ways in which we happen to complement each other. Thanks, Lauren, for being the Laverne to my Shirley, or something. Lauren: We’re actually Thelma and Louise, and this book is us driving off a cliff together. What alternative title would you give the book? Lauren: Actually, this book did have a different title for multiple years! It was originally called By the Rivers of Babylon: Apostates Remember Believing, a reference to Psalm 137:1: “By the rivers of Babylon we sat and wept when we remembered Zion.” The idea was that people who have left the church are experiencing a kind of exile like the Israelites did in Babylon. But it’s already been the title of various songs, books, and movies, so we ultimately decided to come up with something more unique. We were cycling through all these soggy, un-catchy Bible references when suddenly I realized: Chrissy had already created a hashtag with the perfect title. Chrissy: When Lauren suggested that we might name the book after the #EmptyThePews hashtag and the loose community and movement around it that had formed on Twitter, I was immediately on board. I coined the hashtag in August 2017 to protest white evangelical leaders’ responses to Charlottesville and Trump’s “very fine people on both sides” comments, figuring that a hashtag that pointed to evangelicals losing numbers and losing the youth would be a good way to make waves. And it was. I have clarified multiple times that I never intended it to be anti-religious as such, but only to be a call to leave toxic churches for better religion or no religion, as conscience dictates, and to publicly declare our reasons for doing so or for having done so in the past. The radical phrasing is necessary, I think, to convey a proper intensity to the protest, and the hashtag remains an active community hashtag, used daily on Twitter. I like that we used it for the title of this book, which I absolutely see as a continuation of the impulse behind the hashtag. How do you feel about the cover? Lauren: We both loved it as soon as the publisher suggested it! It’s been so exciting seeing people tweet pictures of it! Is there a book out there you wish you had written? Which one? Why? Lauren: Well, when I read Lost Children Archive by Valeria Luiselli earlier this year, I despaired of ever writing anything as good; so, that I guess! Chrissy: This is a tough question for me. I draw inspiration from many writers and intellectuals, but I don’t think it’s possible to write any book you haven’t lived into, as it were. I could say I wish I’d written Barbara Kingsolver’s moving The Poisonwood Bible, but I know I never could have without living her life. I do hope, however, that someday I might also write fiction, and that I might be able to write something similarly compelling that touches on similar broad themes. I have no idea if I’ll even get close. What’s your next book? Chrissy: I’m in the very early stages of working toward my first single-author book, the working title for which is Generation Culture Wars. Building on my previous work including Empty the Pews and the shorter stuff, I want to write essentially an autoethnographic history of the last 50 years or so of the Christian Right and its culture wars, framed through the eyes of survivors who have rejected the Christian Right. Much as Linda Kay Klein did for Pure, I’ll be conducting a lot of interviews and using those to frame the narrative. Lauren: I’m (deep sigh) working on a novel. Is there anything else you’d like our readers to know about your book? Lauren: We’re very grateful to all the contributors who shared their stories with us and waited very, very patiently over the years it took to bring this project to fruition. Chrissy: Thanks also to Frank Schaeffer, an older and earlier renegade from the Christian Right, for providing a foreword that I think grants the book a little more gravitas and situates it in an ongoing trend in which survivors of the culture wars are trying to undo the damage. And to Epiphany Publishers, for taking a chance on the project, and for treating it, and us, very well along the way.Restrictive, false and dangerous religious beliefs abound throughout the world, and dominate the mainstream teachings of organized religion. Religion has caused a lot of unnecessary pain to mankind, despite whatever truth and good intentions it has. Some of these dangerous religious beliefs fool you into thinking you can out-source your morality, ethics or spirituality to some external organization. Others prevent you from taking full responsibility for yourself and your actions, thus hindering you from stepping fully into your power. Still others goad you into a false sense of security where there is none. All of them limit you and the deeper realization of Who You Are. Additionally, all of them stem from the single fundamental delusion of separateness, i.e. that we are discrete and separate beings, that some people are better than others and that there is somewhere better you need to get to. An idea based on separateness leads to judgment and exclusion, and can never be as true and powerful as one based on connectedness. All of the following religious beliefs are disempowering obstacles in the way of true freedom. Believing Silly Things Can Lead to Dangerous Consequences You may think that believing silly things is harmless. They can be, but they can also have serious ramifications. Remember Voltaire’s quote in the image to the left: “those who can make you believe absurdities can make you commit atrocities.” If you can convince people to follow you or your group, and that they will get rewarded in some way by doing this (e.g. get to Heaven, get fame, money, sex, knowledge or power, receive safety and security, etc.), you are well on your way to getting them to commit acts of unconsciousness. Next comes tests of loyalty: will they lie for you? Will they cover up for you? Will they cheat for you? Will they die or kill for you? Believing silly, foolish or absurd ideas can have horrible consequences. If you can’t tell truth from lies, you pave the way for corrupt people to seize power, manipulate you with deceptive propaganda and establish tyranny. How many people have murdered in the name of God or committed heinous crimes in the name of religion, all stemming from their dangerous religious beliefs? Dangerous Religious Beliefs #1: God is on My Side So many people get stumped on this one, and all sorts of horrendous division, judgement, condemnation, war and bloodshed has occurred over it. It takes on various forms: god is on my side (not yours); my god is better than your god; my god is the correct god (not yours); god will favor and reward me (not you), etc. So much of it stems from a false idea of what “God” is. Whatever you think God is, it’s important to realize that the “kingdom of God” or your own divinity is within you – not in buildings of wood and stone. Even Jesus confirmed this spiritual truth when he said (in various places in the Bible and in the missing Gospel of Thomas from the Nag Hammadi) that if you “split a piece of wood, and I am there. Lift a stone and you will find me.” Let’s reduce it to the basics. What is God? For most people, it’s their idea of the infinite being, the creator of all. Another way of saying this is that God = All That Is. If we literally insert the phrase “All That Is” into sentences that contain “God”, look at the results we get: God is on my side => All That Is is on my side How exactly can All That Is be on your side? How can All That Is have any sides? If it did have sides, how could it not be on all sides at the same time? After all, it includes everything. My god is better than your god => My All That Is is better than your All That Is How can you have my or your All That Is? How can you possess All That Is? It’s everything, so it belongs equally to everyone, if it is even able to be possessed. Now, you may have an idea of All That Is, which is your idea to hold onto, but that’s just your idea. It’s your perception or understanding of All That Is. It is not All That Is itself. So again, by inserting All That Is, we reduce the sentence to meaninglessness (reductio ad absurdum as they used to say in Latin). My god is the correct god => My All That Is is the correct All That Is Like the one above, this becomes nonsensical. How can there be a correct or right All That Is? All That Is is simply All That Is. It just is. It’s neither correct nor incorrect; it’s all of it. God will favor and reward me => All That Is will favor and reward me More exclusiveness. I’m “in” and you’re “out”. I’m part of the “in” club, and you are not. This is a powerful delusion and one of the most dangerous religious beliefs. It underpins many of the following religious beliefs. Dangerous Religious Beliefs #2: My Religion is the Only True and Correct Religion The very word “religion” is derived from the Latin verbreligare, meaning “to bind”. Thus, etymologically, religion describes the binding of oneself with God. Some people such as the founder of the Sufi tradition in the West, Hazrat Inayat Khan, have suggested that each and every human is a religion unto themselves, because of their unique and individualized relationship with the Infinite. (Sufism, by the way, is the Path of the Open Heart, and is inclusively open to anyone of any religion, and is not, as widely believed, a subset of Islam.) There cannot be one true religion, because religion itself is a belief system, a lens, a set of perceptions about what Life and God is. Most people adopt the religion they are born into through coincidence of birth. Life is about remembering and experiencing our own connection with the Infinite, not mentally adopting someone else’s belief system. The non-believer, infidel, kafir or heretic threatens the basis of the illusion. The dangerous religious belief, in response, is often to neutralize him in some way. Inquisition, anyone? Dangerous Religious Beliefs #3: Non-Believers or Infidels are “Evil” Psychologically speaking, humans want to belong and to feel accepted. This primal need is exploited by many religions, and twisted into a compulsion to make themselves right and everyone else wrong. If you’re in the club, and your club is the true and correct one, then by definition, everyone else must be wrong – and sometimes evil too. The non-believer or heretic is not only an outsider, but also someone who doesn’t deserve full moral treatment, and often can be seen as less than human. History has shown us that just by thinking differently and independently, you frequently run the risk of being condemned and killed for your trouble. There are a plethora of examples of how people outside a certain religion are considered evil. Look at the dreaded Inquisition whose goal was to suppress heresy at any cost. More recently, documents have shown how British 3 year olds were told that non-Jews are “evil” in a Kindergarten worksheet handed out at ultra-Orthodox Jewish schools in north London. In the Torah, slaves taken from among outsiders don’t merit the same protections as Hebrew slaves. Islam has the concept of “dhimmitude” which is a set of rules to deal with non-Muslims (monotheists are more highly regarded than polytheists). You can check out these Bible quotes to see what Christianity thinks of non-believers. In the end, it is often simply too much for religions to tolerate the free-thinking non-believer, since he or she threatens the illusion and shows that people can be completely free, happy, kind and content outside of religion. The extra special chosen people: one of the most deceptive, self-congratulatory and dangerous religious beliefs. Dangerous Religious Beliefs #4: We Are The Chosen People The idea that “God” has a favorite set of “Chosen People” is another one of these silly yet extremely divisive and dangerous ideas that you find in numerous religions. It is a central tenet of Judaism that Jews are God’s chosen people. The Bible states that Christians are the chosen ones. In the faith of the Jehovah’s Witnesses, there are exactly 144,000 places reserved in Heaven for the chosen people. Calvinism contains the concept of predestination which teaches that a certain special few (God’s elect) are to receive eternal life and salvation by grace, while the rest get eternal damnation for all their sins. In monotheistic religion in general, you are condemned to Hell, eternal damnation or some other kind of imaginary Doom for making the wrong decision in this life for not “believing” in the “official” way it is – according to the supposedly enlightened leaders of those organized religions. More dangerous religious beliefs: worshipping Jesus instead of following him creates more tension and separation. Dangerous Religious Beliefs #5: Jesus, Mohammad and Other Prophets Were a Special Kind of Human that You Can Never Be Many of the world’s main religions love to teach that there is something special or magical about their prophet, as opposed to other religions, spiritual paths and traditions, and also as opposed to YOU! This is another example showing that most organized religion is based on separation, not connectedness. Jesus is the ONLY son of God – you are not. The false notion is that all the prophets are not leaders you can emulate, but rather godly beings who you need to put on a pedestal and worship. You can never be as good as they were, because you’re just adirty little sinner. All this, of course, is in direct contradiction to what Jesus actually said, if we are to believe the Gospel of John 14:12: “I tell you the truth, anyone who believes in me will do the same works I have done, and even greater works, because I am going to be with the Father.” Greater works than Jesus – I wonder how the Christian censors let that one through! Another one of those dangerous religious-beliefs, indeed: always focusing on the future. Dangerous Religious Beliefs #6: Sacrifice the Now for A Better Future Many religions achieve power and popularity through psychological trickery. One of the most effective ways to control people is to promise them a better future – especially if that future is an afterlife about which it is difficult to prove anything. By making elaborate and grandiose promises of Heaven-like afterlives – whether they be full of angels, milk and honey, or hundreds of virgins – you can fool people into accepting horrendous conditions in their current lives. You can also stifle people’s motivation to do anything constructive about their situation now. After all, if this life is nothing compared to the pending glorious afterlife, why bother? Of course, the tendency to deny the (real) now and live in the (imagined and not yet real) future is ego-driven dysfunction and insanity. Eckhart Tolle inThe Power of Now sums it up best: “(The ego) constantly projects itself into the future to ensure its continued survival and to seek some kind of release or fulfillment there. It says: “One day, when this, that, or the other happens, I am going to be okay, happy, at peace.” Even when the ego seems to be concerned with the present, it is not the present that it sees: It misperceives it completely because it looks at it through the eyes of the past. Or it reduces the present to a means to an end, an end that always lies in the mind-projected future. Observe your mind and you’ll see that this is how it works. The present moment holds the key to liberation.” There is a place in life for thoughtful planning and long-term thinking, however this is not the issue here. The problem is compulsive thinking and too much attention focused on the past and future, rather than an embracing of the now and the present moment – which is all you truly have anyway. Dangerous Religious Beliefs #7: Obey Us or Go to Hell Invented afterlife notions provide further fodder for the cunning to exploit the foolish. Bribing people with eternal life works well, but conversely, you can also blackmail people with eternal damnation. Christianity, Islam, Buddhism and others have all concocted ideas of a fire-and-brimstone Hell-like afterlife, replete with pain, never-ending torture and demons. As Valerie Tarico writes: “Most Buddhists see hell as a metaphor, a journey into the evil inside the self, but the descriptions of torturing monsters and levels of hell can be quite explicit. Likewise, many Muslims and Christians hasten to assure that it is a real place, full of fire and the anguish of non-believers. Some Christians have gone so far as to insist that the screams of the damned can be heard from the center of the Earth or that observing their anguish from afar will be one of the pleasures of paradise.” The Indulgence System: based on the dangerous religious beliefs that a middleman priest can absolve you of your sins. Dangerous Religious Beliefs #8: The Indulgence System (Paying for the Right to Do Evil) Organized religions such as Catholicism championed an ingenious business model during the Middle Ages, which still persists in various forms to this day. It was the Indulgence System. Indulgences were the right to do evil. If you have the say over what God allows or not, why not make some money off it? As the website Grand Design Exposed states: “Apparently, the Indulgence System had been a Church tradition since Pope Leo III had begun granting them in the year 800, payable in the money coined by Pope Adrian I in 780 … Indulgences were floated on the Church’s credibility, rather like government bonds are issued on the credibility of states today. In 1491, for example, Innocent VII granted the 20-year Butterbriefe indulgence, by which Germans could pay 1/20th of a guilder for the annual privilege of eating dairy products even while meriting from fasting. The proceeds of the Butterbriefe went to build a bridge at Torgau. Rome’s indulgence economy was as extensive as America’s income tax system today. And it was every bit as fueled by the people’s trembling compliance, voluntarily, to a presumption of liability.” In 1515 Pope Leo X (whose father happened to be the great Florentine banker Lorenzo de’Medici, of the Venetian Black Nobility) issued a Bull of Indulgence, which authorized a whole array of indulgences: “(Leo) authoriz(ed) letters of safe conduct to Paradise and pardons for every evil imaginable, from a 25-cent purgatory release (the dead left purgatory the instant one’s coins hit the bottom of the indulgence-salesman’s bucket) to a license so potent that it would excuse someone who had raped the Virgin Mary. For the payment of four ducats, one could be forgiven for murdering one’s father. Sorcery was pardoned for 6 ducats. For robbing a church, the law could be relaxed for only 9 ducats. Sodomy was pardoned for 12 ducats. Half the revenues from Leo’s indulgence went to a fund for the building of St. Peter’s Cathedral, and the other half to paying 40% interest rates on bank loans subsidizing the magnificent works of art and architecture with which His Holiness was establishing Rome as the cultural capital of the Renaissance.” What a profitable racket! It’s business as usual for the Vatican, who still use the Indulgence System to manipulate people, such as this absurd attempt to get Pope Francis more Twitter followers … More dangerous religious beliefs: the wages of sin is death. Utter nonsense – literally. Dangerous Religious Beliefs #9: Christ Died to Pay for Our Sins This one is obviously from Christianity, but you may find parallels in other religious doctrines. This one requires a serious perversion of reasonable and clear thinking. Christian doctrine declares something like this: “We celebrate Christ’s death, because it is only through his death and atoning sacrifice that we are reconciled to God and have forgiveness of sin. Every time we partake of the communion of the bread and cup, we are celebrating the death that purchased our redemption.” This is utter nonsense – and I mean that literally. It is non-sense. It is completely non-sensical. It requires a suspension of ordinary logic and the adoption of a twisted way of thinking to even try to turn this idea into something resembling a cohesive notion. First of all, why focus on the bloody and gruesome death of Jesus, when the point of his life was his ability to love unconditionally? This is twisted perversion by turning black into white, reminiscent of Satanism, as covered in the article Are Parts of Organized Religion Satanic? Secondly, how can a person dying 2000 years ago “pay” for our “sins”? Your own actions, thoughts, feelings and state of being determine your outcome – period. Only you can “redeem” yourself – by forgiving yourself, apologizing to another, and changing your behavior going forward. What Jesus did or didn’t do a long time ago can’t absolve you from the fundamental truth that you are the creator of your own life and destiny. There is nothing to “pay” for, because a real God of Love doesn’t require humans to prostrate down before it and sacrifice themselves. The word “sin”, by the way, can be better translated as “to miss the mark” or to err, which strips it of all its moral guilt-laden overtones the Catholic Church loves to use on its followers. If you merely make a mistake or error, which every single human does all the time, depending on whom it affected and how it affected them, there may not be anything to “pay” at all for it. Dangerous Religious Beliefs #10: Holy Wars Many of history’s wars and genocides have been fueled by dangerous religious beliefs, including the Christian crusades of the Middle Ages and the many bloody battles recounted in the texts of the Koran and Torah. Even within religious sects there can be a holy war, as can be seen with the constant in-fighting between Sunni and Shia Muslims. Sadly, today we have still not as a species risen above the delusion that war and mass murder can be holy, noble, pious and “the will of God” … although the will of God always seems to be interpreted for us by learned religious scholars and leaders whose word is untouchable. The recent rise of ISIS shows that religion can still be used by some to justify heinous crimes such as large-scale theft (of oil and land), rape and murder. The only thing that really matters with any religion: living from the heart and being kind. Conclusion: Religion is Beset With Madness These 10 dangerous religious beliefs just go to show that most organized religion has long been infected with madness and insanity. The history of religion shows that, overall, it is a highly distorted lens through which to see the world, whatever good it may bring to individual cases. Ultimately, humanity is entering a new era of consciousness where religion and priestly middlemen are no longer necessary. If religion is to survive going forward, it needs to drop all its dangerous religious beliefs, rigid doctrine, stale dogma, sense of superiority and outdated notions in a big hurry – before it becomes an antiquated irrelevance. ***** Want the latest commentary and analysis on Conspiracy, Natural Health, Sovereignty, Consciousness and more? Sign up for free blog updates!Religion, or an organized system of beliefs that typically relates to one's faith and trust in a higher power, is a defining characteristic of the way many people live and make decisions. A person may base a number of life choices on religious views, but when aspects of a person's life conflict with religious ideals, it may be difficult to reconcile the two, and doubt and distress may result. When a person is challenged by religious beliefs, finds that they lead to uncharacteristic actions, or experiences mental distress as a result of internal doubt or external persecution, the support of a therapist or other mental health professional may be recommended. RELIGION AND SPIRITUALITY Though spirituality and religion can be considered to be related concepts, they are not entirely the same thing. While one may express spirituality through religion, spirituality is generally held to be a broader sense of connection to nature, the universe, and perhaps a higher power, but not necessarily one that is directly identified. Spirituality may consist of looser beliefs or practices than organized religion, though it may also involve meditation, yoga, dance, and so on. Religion is often more formalized, and individuals who are religious typically identify themselves as belonging to a certain faith or subscribing to a particular set of beliefs. 22.8% of Americans declare themselves to have no religious affiliation. This number includes those who are atheist, agnostic, or "nothing in particular." Individuals who have no religious affiliation may still experience spirituality. UNDERSTANDING RELIGIOUS ISSUES Religion can have a significant impact on the way a person lives and experiences life. A person who is religious may find a number of areas in life to be at least somewhat influenced by their beliefs. A person may develop faith in accordance with childhood beliefs or as a result of personal searching. Some individuals may experience persecution or discrimination as a result of their belief system. Others might have certain beliefs imposed upon them by family, friends, or intimate partners and feel obligated to uphold these beliefs, even when they differ from personal views. Individuals may choose an intimate partner through their church, or make the decision to marry and have a family based on their religious beliefs and views. A person's friendships or relationships with family members may also be impacted, positively or negatively, by their belief system. Many people find their religious faith to be a source of comfort and solace. They may find that believing in a higher power gives their life meaning and provides them with a set of standards or moral code to live by. Religious faith may make it easier for some to cope with challenges in life and practice compassion toward others. However, some religions may deviate from their outlined doctrine, operate under principles that can be harmful to mental or physical well-being, or discourage individuals from expressing certain aspects of their nature. When this is the case, a person may begin to question or doubt aspects of faith, which can lead to emotional and mental distress. CAN RELIGION AFFECT MENTAL HEALTH? When a person feels conflicted or challenged by religious issues, doubt, anxiety, or depressive symptoms may be the result. Spiritual or religious challenges may effect changes in one's beliefs and practices, behaviors and feelings toward others, and relationship to one's self. Those who are questioning their faith may feel off-balance or uncertain, experience anxiety, or fear divine retribution for their doubts, especially when their faith is based on belief in a punitive god. Some may use drugs or alcohol to cope, self-harm, or experience thoughts of suicide. Religious discrimination and persecution can also have harmful effects on a person's well-being. Not only might some individuals experience anxiety, depression, or stress, some may be victimized by acts of physical violence, which can lead to posttraumatic stress as well as personal harm. A recent study, which examined the correlation between religious beliefs and mental health concerns, suggested that the type of god one worships may have an effect on one's mental and emotional health. Research found that those who believed in a vengeful or angry deity, as opposed to a benevolent or uninvolved deity, were more likely to experience mental health concerns such as social anxiety, paranoia, and obsessions and compulsions. Other effects of religious views on mental health can be seen in the somewhat controversial condition known as religious trauma syndrome. Formally labeled in 2011 by human development consultant Dr. Marlene Winell, RTS describes a collection of symptoms that are often seen in those who have had a harmful experience with religion. RTS can result from the experience of belonging to a controlling religion or develop as part of the impact of departure from certain religious groups. Symptoms might include fear, anxiety, flashbacks, nightmares, panic attacks, depression, and difficulty functioning socially. Often, individuals experience intense fear at the thought of divine punishment, even when they no longer believe in the doctrine of a particular religion, and this fear and distress may follow them for years after their departure from the religious group. Other symptoms may include feelings of worthlessness, learned helplessness, and acts of self-harm. Leaving a controlling religious faith, especially when one was born and raised as a member of the religious group, can not only lead to stress and panic, but may also disrupt a person's life, sense of self, and worldview. Leaving a controlling religious faith, especially when one was born and raised as a member of the religious group, can not only lead to stress and panic, but may also disrupt a person's life, sense of self, and worldview. Some religions might leave their members with no frame of reference of the world "outside the church," which can make transitioning more difficult. Therapists, or any individuals not familiar with the effects of a controlling religion, may find it difficult to comprehend the level of terror experienced by those who are affected. A number of mental health professionals believe that naming and recognizing this syndrome may encourage those affected to seek treatment for it. When therapists are aware of the symptoms of this syndrome and what they indicate, they may be able to address and treat them with greater ease. RELIGION AND PRIVILEGE Those whose faith puts them in the religious majority can be said to experience religious privilege. In the United States, those who belong to some subset of the Christian faith—approximately 70.6% of the population—are likely to experience religious privilege in many areas. This privilege can affect members of minority faiths in small or subtle ways. Christians may proselytize, use religious phrasing or wishes such as "God bless you," or tell others they will pray for them. In some cases, however, the effects of religious privilege may be more harmful, as those not of the majority faith may experience prejudice, persecution, or even physical harm, especially when they belong to a little-known or misunderstood faith. Many individuals who grow up in religious households develop religious views different from those of their parents as they become adults. Questioning tenets of a previously held faith can be difficult, especially when one's entire family follows the faith. A person who becomes agnostic or atheist may still find themselves affected by some aspects of religious doctrine, and parents and other family members may not accept the religious transition and attempt to "re-convert" the individual. Therapy can be helpful in addressing these and other issues that may arise in the process of questioning one's faith or attempting to share one's beliefs with family members, friends, and other loved ones. THERAPY TO ADDRESS RELIGIOUS ISSUES Eastern orthodox candlesIndividuals challenged by issues relating to religion may find it helpful to address and explore these concerns in therapy. Though many therapists may hesitate to include discussion of religion in therapy, as doing is considered to be a somewhat controversial practice, a therapist may be able to offer guidance without either supporting or rejecting a person's beliefs. Instead, the therapist can help the person seeking treatment to clarify areas of doubt or confusion, identify symptoms or general mental distress, and address any effects that religion may be having on health or well-being. A therapist who does not allow bias to color the discussion, who approaches religion—and any other topic discussed—with sensitivity and care, and who respects the faith of a person in therapy may be able to uncover areas of concern relating to one's religion, offer support to individuals coping with religious discrimination or persecution, help people in therapy to reconcile areas of conflict between their religion and their lives, and help individuals develop a greater understanding of themselves, both as a member of their faith and apart from it. When individuals present with symptoms of religious trauma syndrome or have otherwise experienced harm as a result of religious beliefs, a mental health professional may often be able to treat these symptoms and help individuals recognize the trauma they have experienced and begin to reframe thoughts and beliefs in a way that supports mental well-being. Attending group sessions with other people who have left controlling religions may also be recommended to individuals seeking help with religious trauma. When one still feels a sense of belonging to one's faith but begins to doubt one or more aspects of the doctrine, a mental health professional may be able to help that person identify and clarify any concerns and explore solutions and coping methods in a neutral way. In some cases, a secular therapist or mental health professional may provide a referral to a pastoral or faith-based counselor or encourage the person in therapy to seek out guidance from a church member or leader in addition to therapy. PASTORAL AND FAITH-BASED COUNSELING Certified pastoral counselors are licensed mental health professionals who work to provide those seeking therapy with a treatment model that combines spiritual and theological training with psychological understanding. Pastoral counselors generally welcome individuals from all faiths, respecting the individual religious traditions and spiritual commitments of those in therapy. The goal of pastoral counseling is to accommodate an individual's spiritual beliefs into therapy in order to address areas of concern, whether they relate to religion or not, and a variety of approaches and therapeutic methods may be used. Some individuals may prefer to communicate with a member of their religious faith when experiencing mental health challenges or other difficulties in life, but others may find that a pastoral counselor can also provide them with spiritual guidance. CASE EXAMPLES Clarifying beliefs in therapy: Liam, 24, enters therapy, seeking help understanding his spirituality. He tells the therapist he is a member of the Catholic faith, but he is not comfortable with some of the positions of the Church. Though he attends church, he does not do so regularly. He believes in God, but is not sure about much more than that. The therapist asks him why he chose to seek therapy rather than speak to a priest, read the Bible, take a class in religious studies, pray, mediate, or speak to friends and family. Liam hesitates but eventually says that he did not know where to turn. He discloses his uncertainty that God is listening to him and expresses his anxiety and discomfort with his own questioning thoughts. The therapist asks Liam what he values about his religion, and Liam identifies certain values, practices, and the sense of community that he enjoys as a member of the Church. He also discusses the sense of relief and peace he feels after confession. Having the opportunity to discuss his concerns in therapy enables Liam to realize that he does in fact feel a sense of belonging to the Catholic faith, despite certain aspects of the doctrine that trouble him. The therapist helps him to understand that it is normal to question any belief or value system, and they continue in therapy, working to address Liam's discomfort with parts of the Catholic doctrine and to explore ways that he can accommodate both his beliefs and his uncertainty. Addressing religious trauma syndrome in therapy: Violet, 22, enters therapy on the brink of crisis. She tells the therapist that she has not made any plans to commit suicide, but that she has the urge to self-harm frequently, finds it difficult to eat and drink regularly, and is able to think of little else but "the end of the world." The therapist's questions reveal that Violet spent her childhood in a strict Christian church and is still affected by the doctrine. Violet tells the therapist that she has not believed in the doctrine of the Church for years, but that she still worries that God will punish her, even though she is not entirely sure she believes in God. She tells the therapist that feels guilty every time she drinks alcohol, doubts the existence of God, or has sexual thoughts, especially when they involve other women. Every time she does something "wrong," she says, she feels that she has to pray, even though she does not believe she is actually praying to anyone. When she is not otherwise occupied, all of her thoughts turn to what she refers to as "Christ's return" and she constantly thinks, "Will it be now? Will it be now?" She tells the therapist that at times she can think of nothing but her fears, especially at night when she is attempting to sleep. Violet states that she finds it difficult to reconcile what she was taught growing up with her current lack of belief in any higher power. Her mother, who still belongs to the Church, constantly urges Violet to return, telling her that she "fears for her soul." Over several weeks of therapy, Violet addresses her fear, anxiety, and begins to reconcile her personal beliefs and sense of values with those that she was taught. The therapist helps her normalize her desire to engage in sexual activity and reinforces Violet's own knowledge that her sexual orientation is an unalterable aspect of her identity. Violet states that she believes, despite the teachings of the Church, "If there are so many religions, no one religion can be right," and her work with the therapist helps her to become better able to focus on her personal beliefs and values when she is feeling fearful. As her anxiety and fear abate, she is able to eat more regularly and has less of an urge to self-harm. In a few months, her physical and emotional health improve, and she continues with the therapist, finding it helpful to simply express her internal conflict. Religion, or an organized system of beliefs that typically relates to one's faith and trust in a higher power, is a defining characteristic of the way many people live and make decisions. A person may base a number of life choices on religious views, but when aspects of a person's life conflict with religious ideals, it may be difficult to reconcile the two, and doubt and distress may result. When a person is challenged by religious beliefs, finds that they lead to uncharacteristic actions, or experiences mental distress as a result of internal doubt or external persecution, the support of a therapist or other mental health professional may be recommended. RELIGION AND SPIRITUALITY Though spirituality and religion can be considered to be related concepts, they are not entirely the same thing. While one may express spirituality through religion, spirituality is generally held to be a broader sense of connection to nature, the universe, and perhaps a higher power, but not necessarily one that is directly identified. Spirituality may consist of looser beliefs or practices than organized religion, though it may also involve meditation, yoga, dance, and so on. Religion is often more formalized, and individuals who are religious typically identify themselves as belonging to a certain faith or subscribing to a particular set of beliefs. 22.8% of Americans declare themselves to have no religious affiliation. This number includes those who are atheist, agnostic, or "nothing in particular." Individuals who have no religious affiliation may still experience spirituality. UNDERSTANDING RELIGIOUS ISSUES Religion can have a significant impact on the way a person lives and experiences life. A person who is religious may find a number of areas in life to be at least somewhat influenced by their beliefs. A person may develop faith in accordance with childhood beliefs or as a result of personal searching. Some individuals may experience persecution or discrimination as a result of their belief system. Others might have certain beliefs imposed upon them by family, friends, or intimate partners and feel obligated to uphold these beliefs, even when they differ from personal views. Individuals may choose an intimate partner through their church, or make the decision to marry and have a family based on their religious beliefs and views. A person's friendships or relationships with family members may also be impacted, positively or negatively, by their belief system. Many people find their religious faith to be a source of comfort and solace. They may find that believing in a higher power gives their life meaning and provides them with a set of standards or moral code to live by. Religious faith may make it easier for some to cope with challenges in life and practice compassion toward others. However, some religions may deviate from their outlined doctrine, operate under principles that can be harmful to mental or physical well-being, or discourage individuals from expressing certain aspects of their nature. When this is the case, a person may begin to question or doubt aspects of faith, which can lead to emotional and mental distress. CAN RELIGION AFFECT MENTAL HEALTH? When a person feels conflicted or challenged by religious issues, doubt, anxiety, or depressive symptoms may be the result. Spiritual or religious challenges may effect changes in one's beliefs and practices, behaviors and feelings toward others, and relationship to one's self. Those who are questioning their faith may feel off-balance or uncertain, experience anxiety, or fear divine retribution for their doubts, especially when their faith is based on belief in a punitive god. Some may use drugs or alcohol to cope, self-harm, or experience thoughts of suicide. Religious discrimination and persecution can also have harmful effects on a person's well-being. Not only might some individuals experience anxiety, depression, or stress, some may be victimized by acts of physical violence, which can lead to posttraumatic stress as well as personal harm. A recent study, which examined the correlation between religious beliefs and mental health concerns, suggested that the type of god one worships may have an effect on one's mental and emotional health. Research found that those who believed in a vengeful or angry deity, as opposed to a benevolent or uninvolved deity, were more likely to experience mental health concerns such as social anxiety, paranoia, and obsessions and compulsions. Other effects of religious views on mental health can be seen in the somewhat controversial condition known as religious trauma syndrome. Formally labeled in 2011 by human development consultant Dr. Marlene Winell, RTS describes a collection of symptoms that are often seen in those who have had a harmful experience with religion. RTS can result from the experience of belonging to a controlling religion or develop as part of the impact of departure from certain religious groups. Symptoms might include fear, anxiety, flashbacks, nightmares, panic attacks, depression, and difficulty functioning socially. Often, individuals experience intense fear at the thought of divine punishment, even when they no longer believe in the doctrine of a particular religion, and this fear and distress may follow them for years after their departure from the religious group. Other symptoms may include feelings of worthlessness, learned helplessness, and acts of self-harm. Leaving a controlling religious faith, especially when one was born and raised as a member of the religious group, can not only lead to stress and panic, but may also disrupt a person's life, sense of self, and worldview. Leaving a controlling religious faith, especially when one was born and raised as a member of the religious group, can not only lead to stress and panic, but may also disrupt a person's life, sense of self, and worldview. Some religions might leave their members with no frame of reference of the world "outside the church," which can make transitioning more difficult. Therapists, or any individuals not familiar with the effects of a controlling religion, may find it difficult to comprehend the level of terror experienced by those who are affected. A number of mental health professionals believe that naming and recognizing this syndrome may encourage those affected to seek treatment for it. When therapists are aware of the symptoms of this syndrome and what they indicate, they may be able to address and treat them with greater ease. RELIGION AND PRIVILEGE Those whose faith puts them in the religious majority can be said to experience religious privilege. In the United States, those who belong to some subset of the Christian faith—approximately 70.6% of the population—are likely to experience religious privilege in many areas. This privilege can affect members of minority faiths in small or subtle ways. Christians may proselytize, use religious phrasing or wishes such as "God bless you," or tell others they will pray for them. In some cases, however, the effects of religious privilege may be more harmful, as those not of the majority faith may experience prejudice, persecution, or even physical harm, especially when they belong to a little-known or misunderstood faith. Many individuals who grow up in religious households develop religious views different from those of their parents as they become adults. Questioning tenets of a previously held faith can be difficult, especially when one's entire family follows the faith. A person who becomes agnostic or atheist may still find themselves affected by some aspects of religious doctrine, and parents and other family members may not accept the religious transition and attempt to "re-convert" the individual. Therapy can be helpful in addressing these and other issues that may arise in the process of questioning one's faith or attempting to share one's beliefs with family members, friends, and other loved ones. THERAPY TO ADDRESS RELIGIOUS ISSUES Eastern orthodox candlesIndividuals challenged by issues relating to religion may find it helpful to address and explore these concerns in therapy. Though many therapists may hesitate to include discussion of religion in therapy, as doing is considered to be a somewhat controversial practice, a therapist may be able to offer guidance without either supporting or rejecting a person's beliefs. Instead, the therapist can help the person seeking treatment to clarify areas of doubt or confusion, identify symptoms or general mental distress, and address any effects that religion may be having on health or well-being. A therapist who does not allow bias to color the discussion, who approaches religion—and any other topic discussed—with sensitivity and care, and who respects the faith of a person in therapy may be able to uncover areas of concern relating to one's religion, offer support to individuals coping with religious discrimination or persecution, help people in therapy to reconcile areas of conflict between their religion and their lives, and help individuals develop a greater understanding of themselves, both as a member of their faith and apart from it. When individuals present with symptoms of religious trauma syndrome or have otherwise experienced harm as a result of religious beliefs, a mental health professional may often be able to treat these symptoms and help individuals recognize the trauma they have experienced and begin to reframe thoughts and beliefs in a way that supports mental well-being. Attending group sessions with other people who have left controlling religions may also be recommended to individuals seeking help with religious trauma. When one still feels a sense of belonging to one's faith but begins to doubt one or more aspects of the doctrine, a mental health professional may be able to help that person identify and clarify any concerns and explore solutions and coping methods in a neutral way. In some cases, a secular therapist or mental health professional may provide a referral to a pastoral or faith-based counselor or encourage the person in therapy to seek out guidance from a church member or leader in addition to therapy. PASTORAL AND FAITH-BASED COUNSELING Certified pastoral counselors are licensed mental health professionals who work to provide those seeking therapy with a treatment model that combines spiritual and theological training with psychological understanding. Pastoral counselors generally welcome individuals from all faiths, respecting the individual religious traditions and spiritual commitments of those in therapy. The goal of pastoral counseling is to accommodate an individual's spiritual beliefs into therapy in order to address areas of concern, whether they relate to religion or not, and a variety of approaches and therapeutic methods may be used. Some individuals may prefer to communicate with a member of their religious faith when experiencing mental health challenges or other difficulties in life, but others may find that a pastoral counselor can also provide them with spiritual guidance. CASE EXAMPLES Clarifying beliefs in therapy: Liam, 24, enters therapy, seeking help understanding his spirituality. He tells the therapist he is a member of the Catholic faith, but he is not comfortable with some of the positions of the Church. Though he attends church, he does not do so regularly. He believes in God, but is not sure about much more than that. The therapist asks him why he chose to seek therapy rather than speak to a priest, read the Bible, take a class in religious studies, pray, mediate, or speak to friends and family. Liam hesitates but eventually says that he did not know where to turn. He discloses his uncertainty that God is listening to him and expresses his anxiety and discomfort with his own questioning thoughts. The therapist asks Liam what he values about his religion, and Liam identifies certain values, practices, and the sense of community that he enjoys as a member of the Church. He also discusses the sense of relief and peace he feels after confession. Having the opportunity to discuss his concerns in therapy enables Liam to realize that he does in fact feel a sense of belonging to the Catholic faith, despite certain aspects of the doctrine that trouble him. The therapist helps him to understand that it is normal to question any belief or value system, and they continue in therapy, working to address Liam's discomfort with parts of the Catholic doctrine and to explore ways that he can accommodate both his beliefs and his uncertainty. Addressing religious trauma syndrome in therapy: Violet, 22, enters therapy on the brink of crisis. She tells the therapist that she has not made any plans to commit suicide, but that she has the urge to self-harm frequently, finds it difficult to eat and drink regularly, and is able to think of little else but "the end of the world." The therapist's questions reveal that Violet spent her childhood in a strict Christian church and is still affected by the doctrine. Violet tells the therapist that she has not believed in the doctrine of the Church for years, but that she still worries that God will punish her, even though she is not entirely sure she believes in God. She tells the therapist that feels guilty every time she drinks alcohol, doubts the existence of God, or has sexual thoughts, especially when they involve other women. Every time she does something "wrong," she says, she feels that she has to pray, even though she does not believe she is actually praying to anyone. When she is not otherwise occupied, all of her thoughts turn to what she refers to as "Christ's return" and she constantly thinks, "Will it be now? Will it be now?" She tells the therapist that at times she can think of nothing but her fears, especially at night when she is attempting to sleep. Violet states that she finds it difficult to reconcile what she was taught growing up with her current lack of belief in any higher power. Her mother, who still belongs to the Church, constantly urges Violet to return, telling her that she "fears for her soul." Over several weeks of therapy, Violet addresses her fear, anxiety, and begins to reconcile her personal beliefs and sense of values with those that she was taught. The therapist helps her normalize her desire to engage in sexual activity and reinforces Violet's own knowledge that her sexual orientation is an unalterable aspect of her identity. Violet states that she believes, despite the teachings of the Church, "If there are so many religions, no one religion can be right," and her work with the therapist helps her to become better able to focus on her personal beliefs and values when she is feeling fearful. As her anxiety and fear abate, she is able to eat more regularly and has less of an urge to self-harm. In a few months, her physical and emotional health improve, and she continues with the therapist, finding it helpful to simply express her internal conflict. hen he was nothing but a suspended carcass, dripping with his own blood and other people’s spit, there were no worshippers around clapping their hands and singing their hymns. They were long gone. At the very end, ironically at the moment of greatest triumph, he had no followers left. That says something profoundly counterintuitive about what a successful church looks like. For if the core of the Christian message – death first, then resurrection – is so existentially full-on that nobody can possibly endure it, then a church that successfully proclaims that message is likely to be empty and not full. Which is also why, quite possibly, a successful priest ought to be hated rather than feted. For here, as elsewhere in the Christian story, success and failure are inverted. The first will be last and the last first. The rich are cast down and the poor are exulted. The true king is crowned with mockery and thorns not with gold and ermine. Christianity, properly understood, is a religion of losers – the worst of playground insults. For not only do we not want to be a loser, we don’t want to associate with them either. We pointedly shun losers, as if some of their loser-ness might rub off on us. Or rather, more honestly, we shun them because others might recognise us as among their number. And because we secretly fear that this might actually be true, we shun them all the more viciously, thus to distance ourselves all the more emphatically. And so the cock crows three times. But it is true. Deep failure, the failure of our lives, is something we occasionally contemplate in the middle of the night, in those moments of terrifying honesty before we get up and dress for success. Ecce homo, said Pilate. Behold, the man. This is humanity. And the facade of success we present to the world is commonly a desperate attempt to ward off this knowledge. At the beginning of Lent, Christians are reminded of this in the most emphatic of ways: know that you are dust and to dust you shall return. Those who used the period of Lent to give things up are invited to live life stripped bare, experiencing humanity in the raw, without the familiar props to our ego. This has nothing to do with the avoidance of chocolate and everything to do with facing the unvarnished truth about human failure. There is no way 100 top business leaders would endorse the cross. It is life without the advertising, without the accoutrements of success. It is life on a zero-hours contract, where at any moment we can be told we are not needed. But here’s the thing. The Christian story, like the best sort of terrifying psychoanalysis, strips you down to nothing in order for you to face yourself anew. For it turns out that losers are not despised or rejected, not ultimately. In fact, losers can discover something about themselves that winners cannot ever appreciate – that they are loved and wanted simply because of who they are and not because of what they achieve. That despite it all, raw humanity is glorious and wonderful, entirely worthy of love. This is revealed precisely at the greatest point of dejection. The resurrection is not a conjuring trick with bones. It is a revelation that love is stronger than death, that human worth is not indexed to worldly success. In a world where we semaphore our successes to each other at every possible opportunity, churches cannot be blamed for failing to live up to this austere and wonderful message. The worst of them judge their success in entirely worldly terms, by counting their followers. Their websites show images of happy, uncomplicated people doing good improving stuff in the big community. But if I am right about the meaning of Christ’s passion, then a church is at its best when it fails, when it gives up on all the ecclesiastical glitter, when the weeds start to break through the floor, and when it shows others that failure is absolutely nothing of the sort. This is the site of real triumph, the moment of success. Failure is redeemed. Hallelujah. Western Europe, where Protestant Christianity originated and Catholicism has been based for most of its history, has become one of the world’s most secular regions. Although the vast majority of adults say they were baptized, today many do not describe themselves as Christians. Some say they gradually drifted away from religion, stopped believing in religious teachings, or were alienated by scandals or church positions on social issues, according to a major new Pew Research Center survey of religious beliefs and practices in Western Europe. Yet most adults surveyed still do consider themselves Christians, even if they seldom go to church. Indeed, the survey shows that non-practicing Christians (defined, for the purposes of this report, as people who identify as Christians, but attend church services no more than a few times per year) make up the biggest share of the population across the region. In every country except Italy, they are more numerous than church-attending Christians (those who go to religious services at least once a month). In the United Kingdom, for example, there are roughly three times as many non-practicing Christians (55%) as there are church-attending Christians (18%) defined this way. Non-practicing Christians also outnumber the religiously unaffiliated population (people who identify as atheist, agnostic or “nothing in particular,” sometimes called the “nones”) in most of the countries surveyed.1 And, even after a recent surge in immigration from the Middle East and North Africa, there are many more non-practicing Christians in Western Europe than people of all other religions combined (Muslims, Jews, Hindus, Buddhists, etc.). These figures raise some obvious questions: What is the meaning of Christian identity in Western Europe today? And how different are non-practicing Christians from religiously unaffiliated Europeans – many of whom also come from Christian backgrounds? The Pew Research Center study – which involved more than 24,000 telephone interviews with randomly selected adults, including nearly 12,000 non-practicing Christians – finds that Christian identity remains a meaningful marker in Western Europe, even among those who seldom go to church. It is not just a “nominal” identity devoid of practical importance. On the contrary, the religious, political and cultural views of non-practicing Christians often differ from those of church-attending Christians and religiously unaffiliated adults. For example: Although many non-practicing Christians say they do not believe in God “as described in the Bible,” they do tend to believe in some other higher power or spiritual force. By contrast, most church-attending Christians say they believe in the biblical depiction of God. And a clear majority of religiously unaffiliated adults do not believe in any type of higher power or spiritual force in the universe. Non-practicing Christians tend to express more positive than negative views toward churches and religious organizations, saying they serve society by helping the poor and bringing communities together. Their attitudes toward religious institutions are not quite as favorable as those of church-attending Christians, but they are more likely than religiously unaffiliated Europeans to say churches and other religious organizations contribute positively to society. Christian identity in Western Europe is associated with higher levels of negative sentiment toward immigrants and religious minorities. On balance, self-identified Christians – whether they attend church or not – are more likely than religiously unaffiliated people to express negative views of immigrants, as well as of Muslims and Jews. Non-practicing Christians are less likely than church-attending Christians to express nationalist views. Still, they are more likely than “nones” to say that their culture is superior to others and that it is necessary to have the country’s ancestry to share the national identity (e.g., one must have Spanish family background to be truly Spanish). The vast majority of non-practicing Christians, like the vast majority of the unaffiliated in Western Europe, favor legal abortion and same-sex marriage. Church-attending Christians are more conservative on these issues, though even among churchgoing Christians, there is substantial support – and in several countries, majority support – for legal abortion and same-sex marriage. Nearly all churchgoing Christians who are parents or guardians of minor children (those under 18) say they are raising those children in the Christian faith. Among non-practicing Christians, somewhat fewer – though still the overwhelming majority – say they are bringing up their children as Christians. By contrast, religiously unaffiliated parents generally are raising their children with no religion. Religious identity and practice are not the only factors behind Europeans’ beliefs and opinions on these issues. For instance, highly educated Europeans are generally more accepting of immigrants and religious minorities, and religiously unaffiliated adults tend to have more years of schooling than non-practicing Christians. But even after statistical techniques are used to control for differences in education, age, gender and political ideology, the survey shows that churchgoing Christians, non-practicing Christians and unaffiliated Europeans express different religious, cultural and social attitudes. (See below in this overview and Chapter 1.) These are among the key findings of a new Pew Research Center survey of 24,599 randomly selected adults across 15 countries in Western Europe. Interviews were conducted on mobile and landline telephones from April to August, 2017, in 12 languages. The survey examines not just traditional Christian religious beliefs and behaviors, opinions about the role of religious institutions in society, and views on national identity, immigrants and religious minorities, but also Europeans’ attitudes toward Eastern and New Age spiritual ideas and practices. And the second half of this Overview more closely examines the beliefs and other characteristics of the religiously unaffiliated population in the region. While the vast majority of Western Europeans identify as either Christian or religiously unaffiliated, the survey also includes interviews with people of other (non-Christian) religions as well as with some who decline to answer questions about their religious identity. But, in most countries, the survey’s sample sizes do not allow for a detailed analysis of the attitudes of people in this group. Furthermore, this category is composed largely of Muslim respondents, and general population surveys may underrepresent Muslims and other small religious groups in Europe because these minority populations often are distributed differently throughout the country than is the general population; additionally, some members of these groups (especially recent immigrants) do not speak the national language well enough to participate in a survey. As a result, this report does not attempt to characterize the views of religious minorities such as Muslims, Jews, Buddhists or Hindus in Western Europe. What is a median? On many questions throughout this report, median percentages are reported to help readers see overall patterns. The median is the middle number in a list of figures sorted in ascending or descending order. In a survey of 15 countries, the median result is the eighth on a list of country-level findings ranked in order. Non-practicing Christians widely believe in God or another higher power Most non-practicing Christians in Europe believe in God. But their concept of God differs considerably from the way that churchgoing Christians tend to conceive of God. While most church-attending Christians say they believe in God “as described in the Bible,” non-practicing Christians are more apt to say that they do not believe in the biblical depiction of God, but that they believe in some other higher power or spiritual force in the universe. For instance, in Catholic-majority Spain, only about one-in-five non-practicing Christians (21%) believe in God “as described in the Bible,” while six-in-ten say they believe in some other higher power or spiritual force. Non-practicing Christians and “nones” also diverge sharply on this question; most unaffiliated people in Western Europe do not believe in God or a higher power or spiritual force of any kind. (See below for more details on belief in God among religiously unaffiliated adults.) Similar patterns – in which Christians tend to hold spiritual beliefs while “nones” do not – prevail on a variety of other beliefs, such as the possibility of life after death and the notion that humans have souls apart from their physical bodies. Majorities of non-practicing Christians and church-attending Christians believe in these ideas. Most religiously unaffiliated adults, on the other hand, reject belief in an afterlife, and many do not believe they have a soul. Indeed, many religiously unaffiliated adults eschew spirituality and religion entirely. Majorities agree with the statements, “There are no spiritual forces in the universe, only the laws of nature” and “Science makes religion unnecessary in my life.” These positions are held by smaller shares of church-attending Christians and non-practicing Christians, though in most countries roughly a quarter or more of non-practicing Christians say science makes religion unnecessary to them. (For a detailed statistical analysis combining multiple questions into scales of religious commitment and spirituality, see Chapters 3 and 5.) Views on relationship between government and religion Generally speaking, Western Europeans do not look favorably on entanglements between their governments and religion. Indeed, the predominant view in all 15 countries surveyed is that religion should be kept separate from government policies (median of 60%), as opposed to the position that government policies should support religious values and beliefs in their country (36%). Non-practicing Christians tend to say religion should be kept out of government policy. Still, substantial minorities (median of 35%) of non-practicing Christians think the government should support religious values and beliefs in their country – and they are much more likely than religiously unaffiliated adults to take this position. For example, in the United Kingdom, 40% of non-practicing Christians say the government should support religious values and beliefs, compared with 18% of “nones.” In every country surveyed, church-attending Christians are much more likely than non-practicing Christians to favor government support for religious values. In Austria, for example, a majority (64%) of churchgoing Christians take this position, compared with 38% of non-practicing Christians. The survey also gauged views on religious institutions, asking whether respondents agree with three positive statements about churches and other religious organizations – that they “protect and strengthen morality in society,” “bring people together and strengthen community bonds,” and “play an important role in helping the poor and needy.” Three similar questions asked whether they agree with negative assessments of religious institutions – that churches and other religious organizations “are too involved with politics,” “focus too much on rules,” and “are too concerned with money and power.” Once again, there are marked differences of opinion on these questions among Western Europeans across categories of religious identity and practice. Throughout the region, non-practicing Christians are more likely than religiously unaffiliated adults to voice positive opinions of religious institutions. For example, in Germany, a majority of non-practicing Christians (62%) agree that churches and other religious organizations play an important role in helping the poor and needy, compared with fewer than half (41%) of “nones.” Church-attending Christians hold especially positive opinions about the role of religious organizations in society. For example, nearly three-in-four churchgoing Christians in Belgium (73%), Germany (73%) and Italy (74%) agree that churches and other religious institutions play an important role in helping the poor and needy. (For more analysis of results on these questions, see Chapter 6.) Both non-practicing and churchgoing Christians are more likely than the unaffiliated to hold negative views of immigrants, Muslims and Jews The survey, which was conducted following a surge of immigration to Europe from Muslim-majority countries, asked many questions about national identity, religious pluralism and immigration. Most Western Europeans say they are willing to accept Muslims and Jews in their neighborhoods and in their families, and most reject negative statements about these groups. And, on balance, more respondents say immigrants are honest and hardworking than say the opposite. But a clear pattern emerges: Both church-attending and non-practicing Christians are more likely than religiously unaffiliated adults in Western Europe to voice anti-immigrant and anti-minority views. For example, in the UK, 45% of church-attending Christians say Islam is fundamentally incompatible with British values and culture, as do roughly the same share of non-practicing Christians (47%). But among religiously unaffiliated adults, fewer (30%) say Islam is fundamentally incompatible with their country’s values. There is a similar pattern across the region on whether there should be restrictions on Muslim women’s dress, with Christians more likely than “nones” to say Muslim women should not be allowed to wear any religious clothing. Although current debates on multiculturalism in Europe often focus on Islam and Muslims, there also are long-standing Jewish communities in many Western European countries. The survey finds Christians at all levels of religious observance are more likely than religiously unaffiliated adults to say they would not be willing to accept Jews in their family, and, on balance, they are somewhat more likely to agree with highly negative statements about Jews, such as, “Jews always pursue their own interests, and not the interest of the country they live in.” (For further analysis of these questions, see Chapter 1.) When it comes to immigration, Christians – both churchgoing and non-practicing – are more likely than “nones” in Europe to say immigrants from the Middle East and Africa are not honest or hardworking, and to favor reducing immigration from current levels.2 For example, 35% of churchgoing Christians and 36% of non-practicing Christians in France say immigration to their country should be reduced, compared with 21% of “nones” who take this position. There are, however, exceptions to this general pattern. In a few places, church-attending Christians are more accepting of immigration and less likely to say immigration should be reduced. In Finland, for example, just one-in-five churchgoing Christians favor reducing immigration (19%), compared with larger shares among religiously unaffiliated adults (33%) and non-practicing Christians (37%). But overall, anti-immigrant, anti-Muslim and anti-Jewish opinions are more common among Christians, at all levels of practice, than they are among Western Europeans with no religious affiliation. This is not to say that most Christians hold these views: On the contrary, by most measures and in most countries surveyed, only minorities of Christians voice negative opinions about immigrants and religious minorities. There also are other factors beyond religious identity that are closely connected with views on immigration and religious minorities. For example, higher education and personally knowing someone who is Muslim tend to go hand in hand with more openness to immigration and religious minorities. And identifying with the political right is strongly linked to anti-immigration stances. Still, even after using statistical techniques to control for a wide variety of factors (age, education, gender, political ideology, personally knowing a Muslim or a Jewish person, personal assessments of economic well-being, satisfaction with the country’s general direction, etc.), Western Europeans who identify as Christian are more likely than those who have no religious affiliation to express negative feelings about immigrants and religious minorities. Are Christian identity and Muslim immigration linked? The broader debate in Europe Pew Research Center’s survey of Western Europe was conducted in the spring and summer of 2017, following the two highest years of asylum applications on record. Some scholars and commentators have asserted that the influx of refugees, including many from Muslim-majority countries, is spurring a revival of Christian identity. Rogers Brubaker, a professor of sociology at UCLA, calls this a reactive Christianity in which highly secular Europeans are looking at new immigrants and saying, in effect: “If ‘they’ are Muslim, then in some sense ‘we’ must be Christian.” The survey – a kind of snapshot in time – cannot prove that Christian identity is now growing in Western Europe after decades of secularization. Nor can it prove (or disprove) the assertion that if Christian identity is growing, immigration of non-Christians is the reason. But the survey can help answer the question: What is the nature of Christian identity in Western Europe today, particularly among the large population that identifies as Christian but does not regularly go to church? As explained in greater detail throughout this report, the findings suggest that the answer is partly a matter of religious beliefs, partly a matter of attitudes toward the role of religion in society, and partly a matter of views on national identity, immigrants and religious minorities. This confluence of factors may not surprise close observers of European politics. Olivier Roy, a French political scientist who studies both Islam and secularization, writes that, “If the Christian identity of Europe has become an issue, it is precisely because Christianity as faith and practices faded away in favor of a cultural marker which is more and more turning into a neo-ethnic marker (‘true’ Europeans versus ‘migrants’).” Some commentators have expressed strong misgivings about the promotion of “cultural” Christian identity in Europe, seeing it as driven largely by fear and misunderstanding. In the “present context of high levels of fear of and hostility to Muslims,” writes Tariq Modood, professor of sociology, politics and public policy at the University of Bristol in the UK, efforts to develop cultural Christianity as an “ideology to oppose Islam” are both a challenge to pluralism and equality, and “a risk to democracy.” Others see a potential revival of Christianity in Western Europe as a bulwark against extremism. While calling himself an “incurable atheist,” the British historian Niall Ferguson said in a 2006 interview that “organised Christianity, both in terms of observance and in terms of faith, sail[ed] off a cliff in Europe sometime in the 1970s, 1980s,” leaving European societies without “religious resistance” to radical ideas. “In a secular society where nobody believes in anything terribly much except the next shopping spree, it’s really quite easy to recruit people to radical, monotheistic positions,” Ferguson said. But not everyone agrees on immigration’s impact. British author and lecturer Ronan McCrea contends that Muslim migration is making Europe more secular, not less. “Previously, many of those who are not particularly religious were content to describe themselves as Christian on cultural grounds,” he writes. “But as religion and national identity have gradually begun to separate, religious identity becomes more a question of ideology and belief than membership of a national community. This has encouraged those who are not true believers to move from a nominal Christian identity to a more clearly non-religious one.” In Western Europe, religion strongly associated with nationalist sentiment Overall levels of nationalism vary considerably across the region.3 For example, solid majorities in some countries (such as Italy and Portugal) and fewer than half in others (such as Sweden and Denmark) say that it is important to have ancestors from their country to truly share the national identity (e.g., to have Danish ancestry to be truly Danish). Within countries, non-practicing Christians are less likely than churchgoing Christians to say that ancestry is key to national identity. And religiously unaffiliated people are less likely than both churchgoing and non-practicing Christians to say this. For example, in France, nearly three-quarters of church-attending Christians (72%) say it is important to have French ancestry to be “truly French.” Among non-practicing Christians, 52% take this position, but this is still higher than the 43% of religiously unaffiliated French adults who say having French family background is important in order to be truly French. Both non-practicing and churchgoing Christians are more likely than “nones” to agree with the statement, “Our people are not perfect, but our culture is superior to others.” And additional statistical analysis shows that this holds true even after controlling for age, gender, education, political ideology and other factors. In other words, Christians as a whole in Western Europe tend to express higher levels of nationalist sentiment. This overall pattern is not driven by nationalist feelings solely among highly religious Christians or solely among non-practicing Christians. Rather, at all levels of religious observance, these views are more common among Christians than among religiously unaffiliated people in Europe. Altogether, the survey asked more than 20 questions about possible elements of nationalism, feelings of cultural superiority, attitudes toward Jews and Muslims, views on immigrants from various regions of the world, and overall levels of immigration. Many of these views are highly correlated with each other. (For example, people who express negative attitudes toward Muslims and Jews are also more likely to express negative attitudes toward immigrants, and vice versa.) As a result, researchers were able to combine 22 individual questions into a scale measuring the prevalence of nationalist, anti-immigrant and anti-minority sentiments in each country and to conduct additional statistical analysis of the factors associated with these sentiments in Western Europe today. For details of this analysis, see Chapter 1. Same-sex marriage, abortion widely accepted by non-practicing Christians Vast majorities of non-practicing Christians and religiously unaffiliated adults across Western Europe favor legal abortion and same-sex marriage. In some countries, there is not much difference on these questions between the attitudes of Christians who rarely attend church and adults who do not affiliate with any religion. In every country surveyed, on the other hand, church-attending Christians are considerably more conservative than both non-practicing Christians and religiously unaffiliated adults on questions about abortion and same-sex marriage. Education has a strong influence on attitudes on both issues: College-educated respondents are considerably more likely than those with less education to favor legal abortion and same-sex marriage. On balance, women are more likely than men to favor legal gay marriage, but their attitudes are largely similar on abortion. Summing up: On what issues do non-practicing Christians resemble ‘nones’? And on what measures are they similar to church-attending Christians? While the religious, political and cultural views of non-practicing Christians in Western Europe are frequently distinct from those of church-attending Christians and religiously unaffiliated adults (“nones”), on some issues non-practicing Christians resemble churchgoing Christians, and on others they largely align with “nones.” Religious beliefs and attitudes toward religious institutions are two areas of broad similarity between non-practicing Christians and church-attending Christians. Most non-practicing Christians say they believe in God or some higher power, and many think that churches and other religious organizations make positive contributions to society. In these respects, their perspective is similar to that of churchgoing Christians. On the other hand, abortion, gay marriage and the role of religion in government are three areas where the attitudes of non-practicing Christians broadly resemble those of religiously unaffiliated people (“nones”). Solid majorities of both non-practicing Christians and “nones” say they think that abortion should be legal in all or most cases and that gays and lesbians should be allowed to marry legally. In addition, most non-practicing Christians, along with the vast majority of “nones,” say religion should be kept out of government policies. When asked whether it is important to have been born in their country, or to have family background there, to truly share the national identity (e.g., important to have Spanish ancestry to be truly Spanish), non-practicing Christians generally are somewhere in between the religiously unaffiliated population and church-attending Christians, who are most inclined to link birthplace and ancestry with national identity. Many in all three groups reject negative statements about immigrants and religious minorities. But non-practicing Christians and church-attending Christians are generally more likely than “nones” to favor lower levels of immigration, to express negative views toward immigrants from the Middle East and sub-Saharan Africa, and to agree with negative statements about Muslims and Jews such as, “In their hearts, Muslims want to impose their religious law on everyone else” in their country or “Jews always pursue their own interests and not the interest of the country they live in.”(For further analysis of these questions, see Chapter 1.) Overall, the study shows a strong association between Christian identity and nationalist attitudes, as well as views of religious minorities and immigration, and a weaker association between religious commitment and these views. This finding holds regardless of whether religious commitment among Christians is measured through church attendance alone, or using a scale that combines attendance with three other measures: belief in God, frequency of prayer and importance of religion in a person’s life. (See Chapter 3 for a detailed analysis of the scale of religious commitment.) Religious observance and attitudes toward minorities among Catholics and Protestants in Western Europe Although people in some predominantly Catholic countries in Europe, including Portugal and Italy, are more religiously observant than others in the region, Catholics and Protestants overall in Western Europe display similar overall levels of observance. But Catholics and Protestants in the region differ in their attitudes toward religious minorities. For example, Catholics are more likely than Protestants to hold negative views of Muslims: Catholics are more likely than Protestants to say they would not be willing to accept Muslims as family members, that Muslim women in their country should not be allowed to wear any religious clothing, and that they agree with the statement, “Due to the number of Muslims here, I feel like a stranger in my own country.” Differences between Catholics and Protestants on these issues can be difficult to disentangle from historical and geographic patterns in Western Europe, where Catholic-majority countries are primarily concentrated in the south, while the north is more heavily Protestant. But in a handful of countries with substantial populations of both Catholics and Protestants – including the United Kingdom and Germany – more Catholics than Protestants hold negative attitudes toward Muslims. For example, in the UK, 35% of Catholics and 16% of Protestants say Muslim women in their country should not be allowed to wear any religious clothing. In Switzerland, however, the opposite is true; 35% of Swiss Protestants express this view, compared with 22% of Catholics. Context of the survey The survey was conducted in mid-2017, after immigration emerged as a front-and-center issue in national elections in several Western European countries and as populist, anti-immigration parties questioned the place of Muslims and other religious and ethnic minorities in Germany, France, the United Kingdom and elsewhere. Muslims now make up an estimated 4.9% of the population of the European Union (plus Norway and Switzerland) and somewhat higher shares in some of Western Europe’s most populous countries, such as France (an estimated 8.8%), the UK (6.3%) and Germany (6.1%). These figures are projected to continue to increase in coming decades, even if there is no more immigration to Europe. The survey asked not only about attitudes toward Muslims and Jews, but also about Catholics’ and Protestants’ views of one another. The findings about Protestant-Catholic relations were previously released before the commemoration of the 500th anniversary of the start of the Protestant Reformation in Germany.4 This report also includes material from 20 focus groups convened by Pew Research Center in the months following the survey’s completion in five of the countries surveyed. The focus groups in France, Germany, Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom provided an opportunity for participants to discuss their feelings about pluralism, immigration, secularism and other topics in more detail than survey respondents typically can give when responding to a questionnaire. Some conclusions from focus groups are included in illustrative sidebars throughout the report. This study, funded by The Pew Charitable Trusts and the John Templeton Foundation, is part of a larger effort by Pew Research Center to understand religious change and its impact on societies around the world. The Center previously has conducted religion-focused surveys across sub-Saharan Africa; the Middle East-North Africa region and many other countries with large Muslim populations; Latin America; Israel; Central and Eastern Europe; and the United States. The rest of this Overview examines what it means to be a “none” in Western Europe, including the extent of religious switching from Christianity to the ranks of the religiously unaffiliated and the reasons “nones” give for leaving their childhood faith. It also looks at their beliefs about religion and spirituality, including a closer look at the attitudes of religiously unaffiliated adults who say they do believe there is a God or some other higher power or spiritual force in the universe. Europe’s changing religious landscape: Declines for Christians, gains for unaffiliated Most people in Western Europe describe themselves as Christians. But the percentage of Christians appears to have declined, especially in some countries. And the net losses for Christianity have been accompanied by net growth in the numbers of religiously unaffiliated people. Across the region, fewer people say they are Christian now than say they were raised as Christians. The opposite is true of religiously unaffiliated adults – many more people currently are religiously unaffiliated than the share who were raised with no religion (i.e., as atheist, agnostic or “nothing in particular”). For example, 5% of adults in Spain say they were raised with no religion, while 30% now fit this category, a difference of 25 percentage points. The religiously unaffiliated have seen similarly large gains in Belgium, the Netherlands, Norway and Sweden. Sidebar: Religious identity in Western Europe over time Several countries in Western Europe have been collecting census data on religion for decades, and these data (from Austria, Finland, Ireland, the Netherlands, Portugal and Switzerland) indicate that the percentage of the population that identifies as Christian has fallen substantially since the 1960s, while the share of the population that does not identify with any religion has risen.5 More recent data collected by the European Social Survey (ESS) since 2002 show a continuation of the long-term trend in some countries. Christianity has experienced relatively rapid declines in Belgium, Finland, Ireland, the Netherlands, Portugal and Spain. But in the nine other countries included in the Pew Research Center survey, the ESS finds the share of Christians has either been relatively stable or has declined only modestly, suggesting that the rate of secularization varies considerably from country to country and may have slowed or leveled off in some places in recent years. Due to major differences in question wording, the ESS estimates of the percentage of Christians in each country differ considerably from Pew Research Center estimates. The ESS asks what is known as a “two-step” question about religious identity: Respondents first are asked, “Do you consider yourself as belonging to any particular religion or denomination?” People who say “Yes” are then asked, “Which one? Roman Catholic, Protestant, Eastern Orthodox, other Christian denomination, Jewish, Islamic, Eastern religions or other non-Christian religions.” Pew Research Center surveys ask a “one-step” question, “What is your present religion, if any? Are you Christian, Muslim, Jewish, Buddhist, Hindu, atheist, agnostic, something else or nothing in particular?” Using the ESS question wording and two-step approach consistently yields lower shares of religiously affiliated respondents (including Christians) in Western Europe. For example, in the Netherlands, 31% of respondents identify with a Christian denomination in the 2014 ESS, while in the Pew Research Center survey, 41% identify as Christian. Presumably, this is because some respondents who are relatively low in religious practice or belief would answer the first question posed by ESS by saying they have no religion, while the same respondents would identify as Christian, Muslim, Jewish, etc., if presented with a list of religions and asked to choose among them. The impact of these differences in question wording and format may vary considerably from country to country. Who are Western Europe’s religiously unaffiliated? While Christians (taken as a whole) are by far the largest religious group in Western Europe, a substantial minority of the population in every country is religiously unaffiliated – also sometimes called “nones,” a category that includes people who identify as atheist, agnostic or “nothing in particular.” The unaffiliated portion of the adult population ranges from as high as 48% in the Netherlands to 15% in Ireland, Italy and Portugal. Demographically, “nones” in Western Europe are relatively young and highly educated, as well as disproportionately male. Within the unaffiliated category, those who describe their religious identity as “nothing in particular” make up the biggest group (relative to atheists and agnostics) in most countries. For instance, fully three-in-ten Dutch adults (31%) describe their religious identity in this way, compared with 14% who are self-described atheists and 3% who consider themselves agnostics. But in some other places, such as Belgium, Denmark and France, atheists are at least as numerous as those in the “nothing in particular” category. Agnostics, by comparison, have a smaller presence throughout Western Europe. A majority of “nones” in most countries surveyed say they were baptized, and many of them also say they were raised as Christians. Overall, more religiously unaffiliated adults in Europe say they were raised Christian (median of 60%) than say they were raised with no religious affiliation (median of 39%). However, these figures vary widely from country to country. For example, the vast majority of unaffiliated adults in Spain (86%) and Portugal (74%) say they were raised as Christians. In the UK, by contrast, roughly two-thirds (65%) of adults who currently have no religious affiliation say they were raised that way. What has led Europeans to shed their religious identity? For religiously unaffiliated adults who were raised as Christians (or in another religion), the survey posed a series of questions asking about potential reasons they left religion behind.6 Respondents could select multiple reasons as important factors why they stopped identifying with their childhood religion. In every country surveyed, most “nones” who were raised in a religious group say they “gradually drifted away from religion,” suggesting that no one particular event or single specific reason prompted this change.7 Many also say that they disagreed with church positions on social issues like homosexuality and abortion, or that they stopped believing in religious teachings. Majorities in several countries, such as Spain (74%) and Italy (60%), also cite “scandals involving religious institutions and leaders” as an important reason they stopped identifying as Christian (or with another religious group). Smaller numbers give other reasons, such as that their spiritual needs were not being met, their childhood religion failed them when they were in need, or they married someone outside their religious group. For more detail on patterns of religious switching in Western Europe and the reasons people give for their choices, see Chapter 2. Religiously unaffiliated Europeans tend to express different attitudes toward Muslims depending on how they were raised People who have left Christianity in favor of no religious identity may have multiple reasons for doing so. But their attitudes, overall, are more positive toward religious minorities than are the views of either Christians overall or “nones” who say they were raised with no religious identity. On balance, those who were raised Christian and are now religiously unaffiliated are less likely than those who were always unaffiliated to say Islam is fundamentally incompatible with their national culture and values, or to take the position that Muslim women in their country should not be allowed to wear religious clothing. They also are more likely to express acceptance of Muslims. For example, in several countries, higher shares of “nones” who were raised Christian than those who were raised unaffiliated say they would be willing to accept Muslims as neighbors. Definitive reasons for this pattern are beyond the scope of the data in this study. But it is possible that some Western Europeans may have given up their religious identity, at least in part, because it was associated with more conservative views on a variety of issues, such as multiculturalism, sexual norms and gender roles. It also may be that their attitudes toward immigrants shifted along with the change in their religious identity. Or, it could be that some other, unknown factor (political, economic, demographic, etc.) underlies both their switching from Christian to unaffiliated and their views of immigrants and religious minorities. Most unaffiliated Europeans do not believe in a higher power, but a substantial minority hold some spiritual beliefs Regardless of how they were raised, “nones” across Western Europe seldom partake in traditional religious practices. Few, if any, religiously unaffiliated adults say they attend religious services at least monthly, pray daily, or say religion is “very” or even “somewhat” important in their lives. Most “nones” in Western Europe also affirm they are truly nonbelievers: Not only do majorities in all countries surveyed say they do not believe in God, but most also clarify (in a follow-up question) that they do not believe in any higher power or spiritual force. Still, substantial shares of “nones” in all 15 countries surveyed, ranging from 15% in Switzerland to 47% in Portugal, express belief in God or some other spiritual force in the universe. Even though few – if any – of these religiously unaffiliated believers say they attend church monthly or pray daily, they express attitudes toward spirituality that are different from those of most other “nones.” For example, religiously unaffiliated believers – the subset of “nones” who say they believe in God or some other higher power or spiritual force – are especially likely to believe they have a soul as well as a physical body, including roughly eight-in-ten in the Netherlands and Norway. Among the larger group of “nones” who do not believe in any higher power, belief in a soul is much less common. The survey also posed questions about the concepts of fate and reincarnation, and about astrology, fortune tellers, meditation, yoga (as a spiritual practice, not just as exercise), the “evil eye” and belief in “spiritual energy located in physical things, such as mountains, trees or crystals.” Most Western European “nones” do not hold or engage in these beliefs and practices, which are often associated with Eastern, New Age or folk religions. But religiously unaffiliated respondents who believe in a higher power or spiritual force are more likely than those who do not to hold these beliefs. While many “nones” in Europe express skeptical or negative views about the value of religion, religiously unaffiliated believers are considerably less likely than nonbelievers to hold anti-religious attitudes. For example, in Belgium, 43% of believing “nones” agree that science makes religion unnecessary, compared with 69% of unaffiliated nonbelievers. And in Germany, 35% of unaffiliated believers say that religion causes more harm than good, compared with 55% of nonbelieving “nones.” Western Europeans are less religious than Americans The vast majority of adults in the United States, like the majority of Western Europeans, continue to identify as Christian (71%). But on both sides of the Atlantic, growing numbers of people say they are religiously unaffiliated (i.e., atheist, agnostic or “nothing in particular”). About a quarter of Americans (23%, as of 2014) fit this description, comparable to the shares of “nones” in the UK (23%) and Germany (24%). Yet Americans, overall, are considerably more religious than Western Europeans. Half of Americans (53%) say religion is “very important” in their lives, compared with a median of just 11% of adults across Western Europe. Among Christians, the gap is even bigger – two-thirds of U.S. Christians (68%) say religion is very important to them, compared with a median of 14% of Christians in the 15 countries surveyed across Western Europe. But even American “nones” are more religious than their European counterparts. While one-in-eight unaffiliated U.S. adults (13%) say religion is very important in their lives, hardly any Western European “nones” (median of 1%) share that sentiment. Similar patterns are seen on belief in God, attendance at religious services and prayer. In fact, by some of these standard measures of religious commitment, American “nones” are as religious as — or even more religious than — Christians in several European countries, including France, Germany and the UK. Additionally, the survey asked respondents whether they consider themselves religious and, separately, whether they consider themselves spiritual. These two questions, combined, result in four categories: those who describe themselves as both religious and spiritual, spiritual but not religious, religious but not spiritual, and neither religious nor spiritual. The largest group across Western Europe (a median of 53%) is “neither religious nor spiritual.” In almost every country surveyed, roughly four-in-ten or more adults, including majorities in several countries, say they are neither religious nor spiritual. The biggest exception is Portugal, where more than half of adults (55%) say they are both religious and spiritual. Smaller shares of populations in most countries say they are spiritual but not religious, or religious but not spiritual. The religious makeup of Western Europe by this measure is significantly different from that of the United States. The largest group in the U.S. is both religious and spiritual (48%), compared with a median of 24% across Western Europe. Americans are also considerably more likely than Western Europeans to say they think of themselves as spiritual but not religious; 27% of Americans say this, compared with a median of 11% of Western Europeans surveyed. Very few religiously unaffiliated adults – 2% to 4% in almost every Western European country surveyed – say they consider themselves to be religious people. While somewhat larger shares (median of 19%) consider themselves spiritual, this is still much lower than in the United States, where about half of “nones” describe themselves as spiritual (including 45% who say they are spiritual but not religious). A previously published analysis of data from 15 European countries used an older version of survey weights. Since then, Pew Research Center has improved the survey weights for greater accuracy leading to slight differences in some numbers between the two publications. The substantive findings of the previous publication are not affected by the revised weights. Please contact the Center for questions regarding weighting adjustments. Christians may be a super majority in the U.S. They may control the U.S. Congress and, as we all were reminded recently, the Supreme Court. But that hasn’t stopped Bible believers from preparing their children for martyrdom. Web resources abound for church youth leaders who want to make sure their young charges are ready when the lions come for them. Titles include, “Expect to be Persecuted” “Persecution Equals Reward” and “Adventure Game—Persecution of Christians and Paul of Tarsus.” Stuff Fundies Like is a blog by and for people coming out of the Independent Fundamentalist Baptist tradition. Recently one former Baptist told how his high school youth group had been divided into two groups, assigned to play the roles of persecutors and martyrs. In 2012 a youth pastor in Pennsylvania made international news by staging the kidnapping of his young charges to help prepare them for the horrors to come. The Christian persecution complex is absurd. Modern American Christians are not persecuted or under attack. But for Christians who are truly concerned about hostility toward their faith, I have a bit of advice: Don’t be evil. And don’t let your co-religionists get away with being evil either. Advertisement: No, really. In the book of Matthew, Jesus gives his disciples a lot of contradictory advice. Modern day followers pick and choose, but one piece that often gets ignored is this: Be harmless as doves. This advice is not only profoundly moral; it is profoundly self-protective. Far fewer people would be entertaining themselves with fantasies about lions if more Christians took this little nugget seriously. A huge part of the antagonism that even moderate Christians face from outsiders is due to the fact that too many devout believers claim a righteous mandate to say and do things that are truly horrible. Let me spell it out. 1. Opposing protections and rights for children is evil.Thanks to the influence of biblical Christianity, the U.S. stands alone with Somalia in failing to ratify the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. Why? Because the Bible instructs parents to hit their children, among other things. Laws that give rights to children go head to head with biblical texts which say in no uncertain terms that children are the property of their fathers, to be punished or even killed in accordance with the father’s religious beliefs and other priorities. Advertisement: Background Image Progress Bar 00:00 00:00 Volume Bar When a Muslim father in Tunisia recently burned his 13 year old daughter to death for walking home with a male classmate, Christians were rightfully appalled. What many fail to acknowledge is that their insistence on elevating religion above universal ethical principles, human rights, and secular laws regularly costs children their lives, not just children with Muslim parents governed by Muslim theocracies, but also children with Christian parents in towns across America. 2. Denying young people accurate information about their bodies is evil.The U.S. government just spent a decade and a billion dollars on failed abstinence-only education programs concocted by Bible believers who live in some delusional world where prohibition works and virginity is next to godliness. Thanks to their influence, straight-faced educators tell teens that a girl who has had sex is a licked lollipop. Instead of medically accurate information and thoughtful conversation about intimacy and childbearing, teens get promise rings and slut shame. The result? Here in the U.S., more than one in four girls gets pregnant before she turns 20, often with heartbreaking multigenerational consequences for women, children and whole communities.More than half of girls who give birth during high school drop out, permanently. Only two percent ever graduate college. Advertisement: 3. Demeaning and subjugating women is evil.When it comes to dignity and equality for women, instead of acting as moral torchbearers, Bible believers have been at the back of the pack for generations, along with conservative factions from other Abrahamic traditions ranging from Islam to Mormonism. The American Quiverfull movement, “complementarianism,” theexpulsion of Southern Baptist women who were making inroads into the clergy, the Mormon Patriarchy’s threats to excommunicate women who seek equality, the Vatican’s decision to crush nuns who thought poverty was a bigger problem than abortion . . . Need I say more? 4. Obstructing humanity’s transition to more thoughtful, intentional childbearing is evil.“If a woman dies in [child]bearing, let her die; she is there to do it.” So spoke Martin Luther. But beyond the horrors of women dying after days of labor or bleeding out after unwanted childbirth, lies the incontrovertible evidence that children, families and whole communities do better when parents can plan their families. As one medical student put it, “The failure of any sect to support the benefits to humanity that could be obtained through the use of contraceptive technology is blasphemy.” Advertisement: If evidence-based compassion—the intersection of truth and love—was at the top of Christian priorities, hunger and destitution would be vastly diminished because millions of mothers would be able to plan and prepare for their babies. But for two generations, Christian patriarchs have been fighting against public health advocates every step of the way. In June alone, Christians in the U.S. congress voted to slash family planning aid by 25 percent, and the five Catholic men on the U.S. Supreme Court decided that the “religious freedom” of corporations is more important than the right of working women to care for their health and their families. 5. Undermining science is evil.Science has been called what we know about how not to fool ourselves.The discovery of empiricism and falsification—a method of inquiry that forces scholars to ask the questions that could show them wrong—is what has differentiated modernity from the Middle Ages. It’s the reason most of our children don’t die before hitting the age of five. It’s the reason broken legs heal straight, sky scrapers don’t collapse, and our houses are warm in the winter. It is what alerted us to the fact that our carbon consumption has become an existential threat. Advertisement: But the scientific method has also become an existential threat to Bible belief. We know now that the Genesis creation story is myth, neurotransmitters rather than demons cause mental illness, mandrake roots and dove blood don’t improve female fertility or cure skin diseases, and the cognitive structures of the human mind predispose us to certain kinds of religious belief. It may boggle moral credibility that believers intent on propping up the Bible would sacrifice humanity’s best hope of beating the enormous threats we face, threats like resource depletion, food and water shortages, climate change, and rapidly evolving superbugs. But if there’s any overarching theme to Christian history it is this: the end justifies the means. 6. Promoting holy war is evil.What first flipped my bit, what transformed me from an agnostic into an outspoken full-time antagonist of Bible worship was a conversation with my Evangelical relatives about the Iraq war. From the vantage of my relatives and my childhood church “family,” George Bush needed no diplomatic or cultural expertise; he was Born Again. He didn’t need to seek input from his earthly father about the invasion, because he asked his Heavenly Father. Besides, Jesus is coming soon and war in the Middle East is predicted in the Bible. That makes it not only inevitable, but—in a manner of speaking—desirable. Advertisement: Evangelical Christians have spent tens of millions of dollars funding the “return” of Jews to Israeland settlements in the West Bank “as it is written in the scripture”—with the perverse expectation that their presence will one day cause blood to flow in the streets as high as a horse’s bridle. 7. Abusing and killing queers is evil.The Bible’s clobber verses may be open to interpretation, but the fact that those verses have caused centuries of suffering is not. For much of American history, the common term for queer was the biblical “sodomite,” implying that gays are so offensive to God that they pose a threat to society as a whole. Thanks to Christian missionaries, African and Latin American queers also have now lived for centuries now under the threat of violent death. As progressive Anglican Gay Clark Jennings observes, “There is no getting around the Bible when searching for the origins of the homophobia that is rampant in many African cultures. What’s more, Europeans and North Americans bear much of the historical responsibility for this sad state of affairs.” Advertisement: It would be bad enough if we were simply talking about history. But homophobic American Christians, thwarted at home, have turned to inciting oppression in Uganda and Nigeria where their hatred still finds fertile ground. 8. Destroying Earth’s web of life and impoverishing future generations is evil.The book of Genesis may say that only man is made in the image of God and that God gave man dominion over everything that grows or walks the earth. The book of Matthew may say that the return of Jesus is imminent and that his disciples shouldn’t worry about tomorrow, which will take care of itself. The book of Revelation may teach that this world is just a prelude to streets of gold. But some of us think the lives and loves of other species have moral weight of their own. And some of us think that the intricate web that gave us birth is both precious and precarious, and that the wellbeing of future generations matters. And we think those verses in Genesis and Matthew and Revelation reveal more about the hubris and flawed humanity of the Bible writers (and of Bible believers) than they do about divinity. Advertisement: 9. Trying to suck vulnerable people into your poorly researched worldview is evil. It’s one thing to latch onto the supernatural worldview you were raised in or the one that first triggered for you some radically cool temporal lobe micro-seizure or similar altered state. But then failing to do your homework before using your position of adult American privilege to foist your religion on kindergarteners, or families who live in desperate poverty, or people who just got hit by a natural disaster—in other words people who trust you because you are older or richer or more powerful or have more access to the very information that you have failed to use—now we’re talking about a violation of ethics. Just because something is legal doesn’t make it right. Really. Some reader is bound to say that without God anything goes and so as a nontheist I have no basis for calling anything evil. A short snarky retort has been making its way around the internet: If you can’t tell right from wrong without appealing to an authority or a sacred text, what you lack is not religion but compassion. The long answer, meaning the evidence showing we really can recognize evil and good without gods, is available in neuroscience, sociology, developmental psychology, and in the lives of individual atheists including the Dalai Lama. Advertisement: I realize that many Christians are not Bible believers, but rather people who glean through the Christian tradition to claim what seems timeless and wise. I also realize that most Bible believers aren’t trying to do harm—in fact the opposite. I know because I’ve been there. But, when you treat the words of our Iron Age ancestors as if they flowed straight from the mouth of God, you end up putting your life energy, whether you see it that way or not, into bringing back the Iron Age. The Iron Age was a time of incredible brutality—tribalism, warfare, destitution, disease, murder, misogyny, sexual slavery and superstition of biblical proportions. Most of us would rather not go back, thank you very much. Christians who want a better future are welcome to join in the inquiry and teamwork it will take to get there, and many do. For the rest of you: please forgive the fact that your Iron Age fantasies trigger some of us to experience wry Iron Age fantasies of our own. In celebration of Salon’s 20th anniversary, we’re presenting some of our favorite and most popular stories from our archives.Speaking after “appreciating the congrats” on the Orlando shootings, Donald Trump again insisted that what mowed people down at Pulse was not an assault rifle but radical Islam, because in Trump Tower, it cannot be both. Trump’s world is binary. It is zero-sum: Either guns kill people or radical Islam kills people. In that world, only one religion can be bad, and so Christianity is good and Islam is bad. Christianity is peaceful and Islam violent. Christianity is tolerant and Islam intolerant. Both are inherently one thing or the other, immutable blueprints etched in stone for the behavior of their respective adherents. This is a worldview that is shared by people who are Trump supporters and not Trump supporters. In the secular vernacular, we might call this view “Manichean,” that is, a binary between light and darkness, good and evil. But it’s worth noting that “Manichean” was originally used to describe a religion that spread from Persia to the eastern and northern African parts of the Roman Empire in the third century, one that influenced many early Christians. If the word “Manichean” has negative connotations today, it might be because it was deemed a heresy by the early Catholic Church, one that needed to be ruthlessly rooted out of the Christian universe. And I mean ruthlessly: Adherents of a Manichean-tinged Christianity had their goods confiscated and were put to death, even if they converted to proper Christianity but still kept in touch with their Manichean contacts. Even St. Augustine called for their energetic persecution. The reason I bring up the Manicheans is because I am tired of hearing, from Bill Maher and from Donald Trump, that Islam is inherently violent.The reason I bring up the Manicheans is because I am tired of hearing, from Bill Maher and from Donald Trump, that Islam is inherently violent. I am even more tired of hearing that Christianity is inherently peaceful. I have witnessed this debate play out many times over, including at one dinner party when Laura Ingraham turned to the other guests and took a poll: Raise your hands if you think Islam is a death cult. Most of the (politically conservative) guests raised their hands and then took pains to explain to me how, unlike Islam, Christianity is inherently a religion of love. You can support Foreign Policy by becoming a subscriber. SUBSCRIBE TODAY With all due respect to my many Christian friends, I seriously beg to differ. Conservatives roll their eyes when you mention the Crusades — oh, that old thing? — and I’m sure they will when they see the reference to the Manicheans, but they both matter, especially if you’re trying to argue that religions have inherent characteristics. If that was a perversion of Christianity, as many argue, or a fluke, then why can we not extend the same thinking toward, say, the Muslim conquests of the Middle East, or, dare I say it, the Islamic State? You cannot argue that one religion is inherently violent because of the following historical examples, and then wave away the violent history of Christianity and say the exception proves the rule. The Crusades are still a sore subject in the Muslim world, but it’s easy to forget the havoc they wreaked on the Jews of Europe. Time after time, as Crusaders slogged southeast on their umpteenth trip to the Holy Land, they slaughtered the Jews in their path. They herded them into synagogues and set the buildings alight. The Crusaders killed so many Jews in the name of their Christian faith that it was the most stunning demographic blow to European Jewry until the Holocaust. Which, just a friendly reminder, happened in Christian, civilized Europe only 70-some years ago. And if you don’t believe me about the brutal repression of Manichean Christians, you can read about it here in the Catholic Encyclopedia (a publication that “chronicles what Catholic artists, educators, poets, scientists and men of action have achieved in their several provinces”). The Christian Church was ruthless with people whose faith was in any way a deviation from the canon, torturing and burning heretics at the stake. After Martin Luther pinned his theses to a church door, unintentionally spawning a new wing of Christianity, it led to hundreds of years of on-and-off religious warfare between Christians, spilling each other’s blood in the fervent belief that their vision of Christ was the truest. And it’s not ancient history: Violence between Protestants and Catholics continued in Christian Ireland until the very end of the 20th century. “Radical Islam is anti-woman, anti-gay, and anti-American,” Donald Trump said on Monday. “I refuse to allow America to become a place where gay people, Christian people, and Jewish people are the targets of persecution and intimidation by radical Islamic preachers of hate and violence.” The point he was trying to make was that the adherents of radical Islam (whatever that is) are so uncomfortable with those who don’t share their beliefs that they can’t help but turn violent against them. Radical Islam may be all those things and more, but Christianity’s record isn’t much better. READ MORE Let’s take Trump’s concern for Jewish people being “the targets of persecution and intimidation.” It is a wonderful sentiment, but, for the past 2,000 years, until Muslim countries expelled their Jewish populations in 1948, Jews have been targets of persecution and intimidation — to put it mildly — at the hands of Christians. Jewish life in Muslim countries, though still saddled with all kinds of restrictions and orders to wear funny clothing and sporadic violence, was far less bloody than in the civilized Christian West. There are so many historical examples I could mention — Christians killing Jews because they blamed them for the plague; the fact that the word “ghetto” comes from the enclosures in which Jews were forced to live in medieval Venice; the pogroms in which the Russian Orthodox Church encouraged their flocks to kill the non-believing Jews. If that’s too far back in time for you, consider July 1988, the thousandth anniversary of the baptism of Russia: Rumors flew in Moscow that there would be a pogrom to celebrate the day Christianity came to Russia, and that the police were handing out addresses of Jews to the public. (That’s when my family decided to flee Holy Rus.) And if you want to get a list of Christian countries that expelled the Jews but are daunted by the historical dust, look no further than the Trump supporters who regularly tweet those lists at me as proof that Jews deserve the violence they’ve gotten over the years. Then there’s the very modern phenomenon that is the Trump troll, frequently blasting me as a “Christ killer” who deserves anti-Semitism for “mocking the Gospel.” All this punctuated by exhortations to get back in the oven and people thoughtfully ordering coffins on my behalf. And though Trump’s concern is for Jewish people being the subjects of persecution by “radical Islamic preachers,” it is not the radical Muslims I’m worried about as a Jew living in America. There’s plenty of hatred and anti-Semitism in the Muslim world, but the kind I receive around the clock doesn’t come from Muslims. It comes from Trump’s white, Christian supporters. I would much rather he address the persecution of Jewish journalists by his own followers, some of whom freely interweave Christian symbols, white power references, and violent threats in their communications. But Trump doesn’t address them and he certainly doesn’t disavow them. He said he has “no message” for them. Just for the radical Muslims. Watching Trump and the Christian right go after Islam for being homophobic is, frankly, jaw-dropping. If any community in this country has shown itself to be anti-gay, it is conservative Christians and their decades of peddling hatred for gay people, comparing homosexuality to pedophilia and bestiality, claiming AIDS is divine punishment, pushing “cures” for homosexuality, and blocking laws that prevent gays not just from marrying but from being discriminated against. A Christian pastor, who has enjoyed the company of Bobby Jindal, Mike Huckabee, and Ted Cruz, recently said that, according to the Bible, homosexuals “deserve the death penalty.” Now the very same people who, just last month, were comparing trans people to predators who would use the wrong bathroom to hunt for child victims are suddenly lining up to defend gays from radical Islam. And yet, in the wake of the Orlando shooting, some Christians came out to say what they really thought of those gays in that club. One Christian preacher posted a video sermon in which he praised the Orlando shootings, saying, “The good news is that there’s 50 less pedophiles in this world, because, you know, these homosexuals are a bunch of disgusting perverts and pedophiles.” And then there are the ardent American Christians who explicitly link Christianity and guns, who buy up weapons like there’s no tomorrow, but who nonetheless marvel at the warlike Saracens. In fact, the unbelievable vitriol with which conservative Christians have insisted on maligning not just radicals but an entire religion looks a lot like the kind of violence and intolerance of which they accuse Muslims. Friday will mark the one-year anniversary of Dylann Roof killing nine people in the middle of a Bible study in Charleston, S.C. Before his rampage, he wrote a manifesto declaring his allegiance to the white supremacist cause and pointing to the Council of Conservative Citizens, which claims to adhere to “Christian beliefs and values,” as a major source of information and inspiration. By some accounts, Roof came from a church-going family and attended Christian summer camp. Did Roof kill his fellow Christians because he was deranged or because Christianity is violent?” The answer is neither. They are not exceptions, nor do they speak to a violence inherent in Christianity. Because my point is not that Christianity is evil. It isn’t. But neither is it inherently peaceful and loving. And neither is Islam. Nor Judaism nor Hinduism nor Buddhism. No religion is inherently peaceful or violent, nor is it inherently anything other than what its followers make it out to be.No religion is inherently peaceful or violent, nor is it inherently anything other than what its followers make it out to be. People are violent, and people can dress their violence up in any number of justifying causes that seek to relieve people of their personal responsibility because the cause or religion, be it Communism or Catholicism or Islam, is simply bigger than themselves. It’s very convenient for both the perpetrator of violence and his accuser, and yet totally useless: Something can be done with a person who has transgressed, but what can you do with an amorphous concept? Christianity, as I have seen it practiced by my friends or by Christians who saved Jews during the Holocaust, can be beautiful and peaceful and loving. Islam, as it was practiced in medieval Spain, was beautiful and peaceful, too. It can also be hideous and violent, as we’ve seen in many parts of the Middle East, in Europe, and in America in recent decades. Judaism, which people either equate with consumptive erudition or insularity, can wax violent, too. Hanukkah, every secular Jew’s favorite holiday, celebrates in part the victory of the radical, purist Jews over their assimilated, Hellenized brethren. And for my co-religionists piling onto Muslims for their homophobia, let’s remember Yishai Schlissel, who stabbed six at a gay pride parade in Jerusalem — and that was his second attack on the LGBT event. And, heck, let’s throw in Baruch Goldstein, too. Remember him, the guy who killed 29 Muslims as they prayed? Is he an exception, or does his act define Judaism’s inherent characteristics? Even Buddhism, which many imagine to be the very definition of peace, can be bloody. Just look at Sri Lanka, where a Buddhist majority fought a vicious civil war against the Hindu north, or Myanmar, where Buddhists have violently persecuted the Muslim Rohingya. No religion is inherently violent. No religion is inherently peaceful. Religion, any religion, is a matter of interpretation, and it is often in that interpretation that we see either beauty or ugliness — or, more often, if we are mature enough to think nuanced thoughts, something in between.Hey, guys! I am Teo Samarzija from Croatia, and one of the most popular videos on my YouTube channel is my video about atheism in Latin. I've decided I will add some English comments to it. In Croatia, over 95% of the population consider themselves religious, and I do not share that belief. In fact, I think belief in God, as God is usually conceived, is even more irrational than belief in astrology or Flat Earth. People I know often accuse me of being an atheist because I want to sin. Now, if a Muslim or a Jew said that, I'd understand what they mean. After all, their religion is full of rules you supposedly need to follow in order to get into heaven when you die. But I don't understand how can a Christian say something like that with a straight face. Christianity was basically founded by Saint Paul, a serial killer who received a revelation from Christ telling him all his sins will be forgiven if he spreads that word. If anything, Christianity is a religion of those who want to sin. Many people in Croatia also associate atheism with all the horrible things communism has done to Croatians. Well, in my opinion, as I will later explain, what the New Testament has to say about politics has way more to do with communism than what atheism suggests about politics. Now, why did I make that video in Latin? Well, it's the language associated with the Catholic Church, and 86% of Croatians are Catholics. I wanted to show that I am not ignorant of it, as many religious people think of atheists. Also, I wanted to say that I am nostalgic for the good old times when apologetics was a lot more intellectual than it is today. A few centuries ago, apologetics such as Thomas Aquinas were trying to argue that science supports the existence of God. These days, it's obvious to the apologetics such as Ken Ham that science is a threat to religion, so they try to deny science. And I also think what science says strongly undermines there being a creator God. Not exactly that the theory of evolution strongly suggests that God doesn't exist, you can still say evolution was a tool, but the fact that there were multiple mass extinctions. The vast majority of species that existed on Earth didn't evolve into species we have today, they died out in one of those mass extinctions. That strongly suggests evolution isn't really moving towards some goal and isn't used by God as a tool to create advanced forms of life. Anyway, let's get started with the video... Well, yes, many people feel insulted when you talk about religion if your religious views differ from theirs. However, like Neil de Grose Tyson said, being insulted isn't a sure sign somebody is trying to trick you. You should try to talk about various topics in a way that doesn't insult people, however, that doesn't mean you should always avoid topics just because some people are offended by them. Reality stays there even if we don't talk about it. I think the existence of terrorism is one of the best arguments against the existence of God. See, atheists often ask religious people, if there is a good omnipotent God, how come are there so many religions around the world, almost all of them false. Religious people generally give two responses. One response is that God needs to give people free will, and not letting people choose their religion would be a violation of free will. An obvious problem with that response is, if religious knowledge violates free will, does any knowledge then somehow violate free will? The other problem with that response is, well, where is free will in somebody being a terrorist because of a false religion? The guy who controlled that airplane on 9/11 attacks, he was afraid that, if he doesn't kill all those people including himself, he will end up in hell for eternity. It's not really that he chose to be a terrorist, he was under imagined threat of hell. In what sense would God revealing himself to that terrorist and telling him it's not God's will for terrorism to exist be a violation of free will? That would be giving that terrorist free will. The other response religious people sometimes give is that other religions aren't completely false, that God reveals himself under a different name to different cultures. But what when it's not just the difference in the name, or the difference in the name at all? What when Allah reveals himself to one person telling them murder is wrong, and to another person to tell them to be a terrorist? Now, religious people usually respond with, "Well, such revelations are rare. They may be evil spirits or hallucinations.". Well, then, if we know some revelations from God are false, why not assume all of them are false? Furthermore, revelations advocating violence, while relatively rare now, were a normal hing thousands of years ago. Thousands of years ago, human sacrifice was a normal thing. Why do revelations seem to get more sensible as humans get wiser? Makes no sense if you assume God is real. That was essentially the same argument as used by Essence of Thought, a popular atheist and feminist blogger, in his series "Refuting Divine Revalation", and partly in the Thunderfoot's series "Why do people laugh at creationists?". Thunderfoot, a popular atheist and anti-feminist blogger, called my attention to this verse at the beginning of the Acts book, and, when you think about it, it's actually hilarious. Like Thunderfoot said, that statement is literally as stupid as saying that the sun going red at sunset is a sign of God. Because moon going red during lunar eclipses and sun going red at sunset happen for the exactly same reason. It takes a lunatic to make such a statement, and Luke, the physician who wrote the Book of Acts, clearly was a lunatic. Many people I know think that, although Bible may not be scientifically right, the Bible, or at least the New Testament is morally and politically right. But, see, it isn't. That is, unless you believe in communism, it isn't. If we take what's attributed to Jesus in the New Testament to be actual Jesus'es words, Jesus was a communist, it's just that the word communism wasn't coined back then. If you say that the wealth inequality naturally increases over time, that the war is a solution to the world's problems, that taxes are ethical and you despise private property, then you are advocating communism. Be it under another name, it's still communism. There is somehow perception that Jesus advocated freedom and pacifism, that's not what the New Testament teaches. A lot of people think Jesus was against death penalty. Well, the Gospel of John says he was against death penalty for adultery. And it's questionable whether that part was in the original Gospel of John, rather than a later addition. But even if we assume it's real, it tells us only that Jesus was against death penalty for adultery, it tells us nothing about Jesus being against death penalty for murder, which is what modern debate about death penalty is about. A lot of people think the Bible has been mistranslated and that the apparent disagreements with science come from those mistranslations, or even that the Bible predicted some amazing scientific discoveries, but it got lost in translation. And, you know, I understand the appeal of such hypotheses. In fact, I myself have put a lot of effort into my alternative interpretation of the Croatian toponyms, available on my website. I hypothesize that, for instance, the name "Issa", the ancient name for the Vis island, meant "spring" in some stage of the Illyrian language, and that that escaped those in antiquity who tried to etymologize that name, Strabo and the anonymous scribe who wrote the inscription on the Roman forum in Issa. Strabo suggested the name Issa might be related to the name Antissa, a place on the Greek island of Lesbos, and the anonymous scribe suggested the name Issa comes from the name of the Illyrian king called Ionios. But, you know, I think having such hypotheses about the meaning of the Bible verses is rather arrogant. There were literally hundreds of Biblical scholars in antiquity who knew Ancient Greek and Hebrew way more than anybody knows today, so, if the Bible really contains amazing scientific knowledge, how come nobody of them noticed that? Furthermore, why would an omnipotent and good God allow his word to be mistranslated? Why doesn't God reveal himself every now and then with a non-corrupt version of his message in a widely understood language? Or why didn't he write a text that was easy to translate? The Bible is not only hard to translate, in fact, some parts of the Bible have obviously been corrupt. A good example of that is the prophecy by Ezekiel about the destruction of the city of Tyre. Two things to suggest this is not an inerrant word of God. First of all, it obviously didn't happen, Tyre is still right there where it's always been, it wasn't destroyed at the time of Ezekiel never to be rebuilt again. Second, it's not all clear from the context whom the word "they" refers to. That strongly suggests the Book of Ezekiel we are reading today isn't exactly the same as Ezekiel wrote it. Why would God let that happen to his word? This also severely undermines all the supposedly fulfilled prophecies, how do we know they weren't added into the books after the fact? And, yes, the Bible is very unclear about quite a few things that matter ethically. Is abortion morally right? The Bible is not clear about that? Is eating meat if you have a choice what to eat morally right? Again, the Bible is unclear. I am not saying the Bible didn't get some things amazingly right. Like, the advice not to consume meat and milk products together makes perfect sense if you consider that heme iron from red meat causes colon cancer and that omega-6 acids increase that effect. But, you know as they say, a stopped clock is right two times a day. We also need to consider what it got wrong, like claiming that mildew can be treated with bird's blood in Leviticus 14:52. The undeniable truth is that the Greek and Roman philosophers got way more science right than any supposed holy book. And even what those holy books got right, they could have copied the works of those philosophers. Yes, Saint Paul did write in First Epistle to Corinthians in chapter 15 that stars are way more far away than the Sun is, but dare I suggest he was simply familiar with the work of Aristarchus from 300 years earlier? And so on... Now, many people, including many atheists, consider Richard Dawkins to be a bit anti-intellectual, and they consider quoting him to be a way to discredit yourself. I don't think so. I think Richard Dawkins made a good argument asking theologians to justify their field as a legitimate field of study. What has theology done useful? Theology is basically divided into natural theology and revealed theology. Natural theology has thus far only given us bunch of pseudological arguments for the existence of God, and I think everybody will agree the vast majority of them fail after a very short period of scrutiny. You don't need to be an atheist to think Pascal's Wager is one of the worst pieces of philosophy ever written. And revealed theology is based on the obviously false premise that a text full of contradictions and obvious nonsense is a word of God. Or, better say, it's a bunch of guesses about supernatural that claim to be based on the Bible, but most of them obviously aren't. And they have had a horrible impact on the society. Burning witches, for example. Also, as Richard Dawkins points out, quite a few theologians in the 19th century, though I don't know if it was most of them, were against searching for cures for some diseases, because they argued they were a consequence of sin. And this is not limited to Christianity, this went way back to the Ancient Greece, where Aeschilus in Prometheus Bound said no man has ever discovered any medicine. You might say this argument is based on the utilitarian theory of truth, which is philosophically very problematic, that truth of some statement has nothing to do with its usefulness. But I don't think it is. If you assume there is a God that reveals himself to people, you'd expect theology to be useful, right? But it isn't. What does a theologian know that an average person doesn't? If we take knowledge to mean justifiable true belief that's not based on a coincidence, as most philosophers today define knowledge, the answer appears to be nothing. In what other academic field do the basic tenets of that field depend on the culture? That's not to say some other academic fields aren't as nonsensical as theology is. Gender studies are rather similar to theology, equally dogmatic and unscientific. One of the most popular and probably oldest arguments for atheism, dating back to pre-Socratic philosophers, is the existence of evil in the world. The argument is basically that if there is an omnipotent, good and omniscient God or gods, we'd expect there to be no evil, there will be no suffering in the world. Like Epicurus said, are Gods able to end the suffering but are not willing to? Then they are evil, and that's quite an unacceptable conclusion. Are Gods willing to but not able to end the suffering in the world? Then they are not omnipotent, but God is by definition omnipotent. Are they able to and willing to, but don't know how to? Then they are not omniscient, and, again, that's a hardly acceptable conclusion. And if you don't see why, ask yourself, what's the point of prayer if God is either unable or unwilling to help people, or doesn't know how to help them. Now, Matt Dillahunty, one of the atheist bloggers who are most educated on the topic, considers the argument from evil to be a very weak argument, as basically an argument from ignorance, and that it's only successful because it's intuitive. Well, I don't think it's an argument from ignorance any more than "If the Earth is not round, why do ships appear to sink as they pass over the horizon?" is an argument from ignorance. The existence of evil is an empirical matter, much like the Earth being round is, and you usually can't have an a-priori argument about an empirical matter. When it comes to empirical claims, we need to weigh the evidence, rather than search for mathematical proofs. Ships disappearing bottom first is not proof the Earth is round, but it is strong evidence the Earth is round. Similarly, the existence of suffering in the world might not be a proof that a God doesn't exist, but it's strong evidence God doesn't exist. The most common response religious people give to the existence of evil in the world is that God needs not to interfere with free will, and evil is one of the necessary downsides of having free will. I think this argument is the same form of reasoning used by the Flat-Earthers to disregard the evidence. Flat-Earthers say ships disappearing bottom first as they pass over the horizon is caused by waves. Well, you can explain some instances of that in that manner, but you cannot explain all of them that way. The same thing happens when there are no waves. Similarly, you can perhaps explain the Holocaust as a consequence of free will, because it was an intentional genocidal policy. But you cannot explain the greatest tragedy of the 20th century, the Great Chinese Famine, that way. Great Chinese Famine wasn't intentional, it was caused by the government believing pseudoscience called Lysenkoism and trying to improve the agriculture using it, making things a lot worse. Why would God let that happen? And this is before we get to the natural evil. A lot of suffering is caused by earthquakes, and earthquakes clearly aren't caused by free will. You can perhaps explain some evil as being caused by free will, you cannot explain all of it that way. Furthermore, the existence of suffering, as we now know thanks to modern science, long predates the existence of will. All the birds and almost all the mammals feel pain, but only humans have will, other animals behave by instincts rather than by reason. The ability to feel pain probably evolved separately in birds and mammals. Now, there are some mammals that don't feel pain, such as naked mole rats, but that's probably de-evolution. I think we can safely assume that 55 million years ago, at the time of the first mammals, some animals felt pain. And they were dying of painful accidents and cancers long before free will existed. When did free will come into existence? The last common ancestor of humans and chimpanzees lived 7 million year ago, so, unless you assume monkeys also have will, you can perhaps push the emergence of will to around 5 million years ago. For 50 million years, there was suffering and evil, but there was no free will. And there is an even deeper problem with this Free Will Theodicy. If there is an omniscient God... how can there even be free will? Free will can also be used as an argument against the existence of God. Erasmus of Rotterdam wrote entire books trying to rationalize the existence of free will with the existence of an omniscient God, but like most theology, these are just ad-hoc hypotheses. The apparent contradiction between an omniscient God and free will significantly undermines theism. Many theologians think the best argument for the existence of God is the Anselm's ontological argument. Now, to avoid confusion, there are many arguments in apologetics called ontological arguments. There is the Anselm's ontological argument which we will discuss later. Then there is the dialectological argument, also sometimes called ontological argument, and dialectological argument basically asks if there is no God, how is talk and reasoning in general possible? Why does the universe obey the laws of logic if there is no God? The response to that I can think of is a rhetorical question how does the existence of God explain that? Why does the universe, if there is an omnipotent and benevolent God, who sometimes intervenes in this universe, appear to strictly obey the laws of logic? Why it is that, if you burn fossil fuels, you cause global warming? Why doesn't God intervene to make it impossible? Why it is that, if you eat meat from infected animals, which may not even have symptoms, you can cause global pandemic, kill hundreds of thousands of people and destroy the world's economy? Why doesn't God intervene to prevent that? See, this is almost like when Flat-Earthers use the horizon appearing to rise with you as you climb as an argument for the Earth being flat. Even if mainstream science couldn't explain that, that wouldn't be an argument for the Earth being flat, because the Earth being flat doesn't explain that either. It's not a tu-quoque fallacy to point out that your opponent's theory suffers from the exact same problem that your opponent complains about in your theory, tu-quoque fallacy is pointing to an unrelated problem. Another argument called ontological argument is the Thomas Aquinas'es argument about the degrees of properties. If an object has a property to a lesser extent, then there exists some other object that has the property to the maximum possible degree. Some people are powerful, therefore there supposedly must be an object that is absolutely powerful, and that's God. Some people are good, therefore there must be an object which is absolutely good, and that's God. But let's apply that logic to something else. Some things are cold, therefore, there must be an object which is absolutely cold. And, of course, there being an object that's absolutely cold would contradict the third law of thermodynamics. See the problem with that argument? Richard Dawkins suggested that Pascal was joking when formulating Pascal's Wager, and I dare suggest Aquinas was joking when formulating that argument. Aquinas was, as well as being a philosopher, he was also a comedian. Now, arguably the best ontological argument for the existence of God, and, according to many philosophers of religion, the best argument for the existence of God altogether is the Anselm's ontological argument. Now, there are many variations of the Anselm's ontological argument, some even involving formal logic, but the basic logic always goes something like this. The first premise is that God is easy to imagine, and that somehow means God exists in some possible worlds. The second premise is that if a God exists, he is a perfect being. The third premise is that if something is perfect, then it has to exist in all possible worlds. The forth premise is that our world is one of the possible worlds. And the conclusion is that God exists in our world as well. I can see how somebody can find that argument convincing, however, I think the first premise is a subtle fallacy of equivocation. Just because it's easy to imagine a perfect being, doesn't mean it exists in any possible world, any more than it being easy to imagine a mathematician constructing a square with the same area as a circle proves that a method to do so exists in some possible worlds. Or it being easy to imagine there being a computer program that solves the Halting problem or tells me for an arbitrary polynomial whether it has integer roots proves such things are possible. I guess that to somebody who hasn't studied atheist philosophy, the first premise sounds acceptable. But to somebody who has and who knows about the omnipotence paradox, not quite. The omnipotence paradox basically asks if a God, who is by definition omnipotent, can limit his own power. If he can't, then he is not omnipotent. If he can, then he is also not omnipotent because he can't lift those limitations he ascribed to himself. The only way to escape the paradox is, like Thomas Aquinas said, to suppose God is omnipotent in this world now, but might not be so in the future. That God can create a rock so heavy he himself couldn't lift it, but such a rock doesn't exist currently in this world, and thus God is accidentally omnipotent. But then, is God still a perfect being? No, he isn't. Thus the ontological argument still fails. So, I haven't talked anything about whether I think Jesus existed or whether I think souls exist. Well, I don't have overly strong opinions about those things. I think the person named Jesus from Nazareth probably existed, but that little can be known about him. The gospels clearly aren't historically correct. There is no evidence of the census at the time of Herod in Judea that the Gospel of Luke is talking about, and there is also no evidence of the Massacre of the Innocents that the Gospel of Mathew is talking about. Something like that missing from the historical record would require an explanation. As for the story of crucifixion, I'd say it's probably made up as well. Philo of Alexandria was, around 40 CE, writing a book against Pontius Pilatus, and, while he mentioned quite a few bad things Pontius Pilatus had done, he didn't mention that he crucified anybody. Kind of a hard detail to miss. Jesus is really in between Moses and Muhammed in this regard. If you suggest Muhammed didn't exist as a historical person, you sound silly. If you suggest Moses existed as a historical person, you sound silly. When it comes to Jesus, both sounds plausible. As for souls, well, the case one cam make against souls is not as strong as the case one can make against God. The best argument I've heard against the existence of souls is that, as they are commonly imagined, as something that is invisible and otherwise undetectable, but can see and hear, sharply contradicts quantum mechanics. Namely, quantum mechanics teaches us there is no such thing as a passive observer. When an electron is seen, it stops behaving like a wave and starts behaving like a particle. So, if we imagine souls as something which can't be seen or otherwise detected but it can see, we are contradicting quantum mechanics. It's not quite as strong argument as the omnipotence paradox against God is, but I think it's still relatively strong. Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford [1798], at sacred-texts.com MEMOIRS ILLUSTRATING THE HISTORY of JACOBINISM Written in FRENCH by THE ABBE BARRUEL And translated into ENGLISH by THE HON. ROBERT CLIFFORD, F.R.S. & A.S. Princes and Nations shall disappear from the face of the Earth . . . and this REVOLUTION shall be the WORK OF SECRET SOCIETIES. Weishaupt's Discourse for the Mysteries Part III. THE ANTISOCIAL CONSPIRACY. Second Edition, revised and corrected. London Printed for the TRANSLATOR, by T. BURTON, No. 11, Gate-street, Lincoln's-Inn Fields. Sold by E. BOOKER, No. 56, New Bond-street. [1798] Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com by John Bruno Hare, 2006-8. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923. Click to enlarge Title Page Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford [1798], at sacred-texts.com [p. 393] THE ANTISOCIAL CONSPIRACY PRELIMINARY OBSERVATIONS On the Illuminees [*1] and on the different Works whereon these MEMOIRS are grounded. THE third conspiracy, which I am now about to investigate, is that of the Atheistical Illuminees, which at my outset [*2] I denominated the conspiracy of the Sophisters of Impiety and Anarchy against every religion natural or revealed; not only against kings, but against every government, against all civil society, even against all property whatsoever. The name of Illuminee which this Sect (the most disastrous in its principles, the most extensive in its views, the most atrociously cunning in its means) has chosen, is of ancient standing in the annals of disorganizing Sophistry. It was the name which Manes and his disciples first affected, gloriantur Manichaei se de caelo illuminatos. [*3] The first Rosicrucians also, who appeared in Germany, called themselves Illuminees. And later, in our time, the Martinists (with many other sects) have pretended to Illuminism. As an outline for history I distinguish them by their plots and tenets, and will reduce them into two classes, the Atheistical and the Theosophical Illuminees. These latter more particularly comprehend the Martinists, whom I have already mentioned in my second volume, and the Swedenbourgians, whom I shall mention in proper place, where also I shall give what information I have been able to collect relating to them. The Atheistical Illuminees are the objects of the present volume, and it is their conspiracy that I mean to disclose. The very numerous letters, books, and manuscripts, which I have received since the publication of my proposals, has rendered it impossible for me to comprise the proposed investigation in one volume. The baleful projects of the Sect and the laws for their execution are so strangely combined, that I thought it necessary to begin by making my reader perfectly acquainted with its code; that is to say, with the regular progression of its degrees, mysteries, and government. This alone requiring an entire volume, I am reduced to the necessity of giving a fourth, in which I shall develope the history of Illuminism, and make [p. 394] an application of the triple conspiracy to the French Revolution. I have more particularly applied myself to the investigation of the legislative part of this conspiring Sect, as no work has yet been published in which the whole of their code is to be found. Detached parts only were to be met with scattered throughout the papers which had been seized by the public authority. These I have collected and digested; thus enabling the reader more easily to judge what has been and what must have been the result of such laws. In such an undertaking, I feel myself bound to lay before the public an account of the documents on which I ground my proofs. The following then is a list of the principal works, with a few observations on each, that the reader may form his own judgment as to their authenticity. I. The first is a collection entitled "Some of the Original Writings of the Sect of Illuminees, which were discovered on the 11th and 12th of October, 1786, at Landshut, on a search made in the House of the Sieur Zwack, heretofore Counsellor of the Regency; and printed by Order of His Highness the Elector.--Munich, by Ant. Franz, Printer to the Court." [*4] II. The second is a supplement to the Original Writings, chiefly containing those which were found on a search made at the castle of Sandersdorf, a famous haunt of the Illuminees, by order of His Highness the Elector. Munich, 1787. [*5] These two contain irrefragable proofs of the most detestable conspiracy. They disclose the principles, the object, and the means of the Sect; the essential parts of their code, the diligent correspondence of the adepts, particularly that of their chief, and a statement of their progress and future hopes. The editors indeed have carried their attention so far, as to mention by whose hand the principal documents or letters were written. At the beginning of the first volume, and on the frontispiece of the second, is seen the following remarkable advertisement by order of the Elector:--"Those who may harbour any doubt as to the authenticity of this collection, have only to apply to the office where the secret archives are kept at Munich, and where orders are left to show the originals." [*6] I entreat that my readers will recollect this advertisement whenever they shall see the Original Writings cited. III. "The True Illuminee, or the real and perfect Ritual of the Illuminee; of the Illuminee; comprehending the Preparation, the Noviciate, the Minerval Degree, that of the Minor and Major Illuminee, all without addition or omission."--With respect to the authenticity of this work, we need only quote the testimony of the Baron Knigge, surnamed Philo, the most famous of the Illuminees after the Founder of the Sect; and who was actually the chief compiler of its Code, as he tells us himself: "All these degrees (says he), such as I composed them, have been printed this year at Edesse (Frankfort on the Mein) under the title of the True Illuminee. I am ignorant of the author; but they appear exactly as they flowed from my pen; that is to say, as I compiled them." [*7] This certainly is an authenticated document on the Sect, and recognized by the compiler himself. [p. 395] IV. I now proceed to a work which was published by this same Philo,--under the title of "Last Observations, or Last Words of Philo, and Answers to divers Questions on my connections with the Illuminees." In this work Philo-Knigge gives us an account of himself and of his Illuminism, of his agreements with the chiefs of the Sect, and of his labours for it. His vanity, however, makes this narrative fulsome. The reader will observe in his writings one of those pretended Philosophers who treat all religious objects with that contempt which they themselves deserve. This is of no consequence; he attempts to justify his own conduct; his avowals may therefore be received in testimony against the Sect. V. "The last Works of Spartacus and Philo," Die neusten Arbeiten des Spartacus und Philo. Except the Original Writings, this is the most intelligent and important work that has been published on the Illuminees. It contains the two degrees of the greatest consideration both on account of the mysteries revealed in them by the Sect, and of the laws laid down for the adepts.--Not a shadow of doubt can be maintained as to the authenticity of this work. These degrees and laws are published with a certificate of Philo attesting their conformity with the original, and under the seal of the Order. This certificate was scarcely necessary. Whoever can read must easily perceive that these degrees and these laws are no other than a compilation, and often (in the most essential parts) but a copy of the discourses, precepts, and principles, contained in the Original Writings. The publisher is a man who has passed through all the degrees of Illuminism. More dexterous than Philo, he makes himself master of his secret, and of that of the whole Sect. The better to unmask Illuminism, he becomes an Illuminee; and he has so well succeeded, that no member of the Order was better acquainted with it than himself. VI. The same writer has published A Critical History of the Degrees of Illuminism, a valuable work, in which every thing is proved from the very letters of the grand adepts. VII. The Directing Illuminee, or the Scotch Knight. This may be said to be the counterpart of the Last Works of Philo and Spartacus. It is a description of the most important intermediary degree of Illuminism. The Editor does not indeed publish it under the signet of the Order; but when the reader has compared it with the Original Writings, and even with the criticism on it by the chief, who was not much pleased with the compiler, he will soon decide that the grand seal of the Order is not necessary to authenticate it. VIII. Remarkable Depositions respecting the Illuminees. These are three juridical depositions on oath, and signed 1st by Mr. Cosandy, Canon and Professor at Munich; 2dly by Mr. Renner, Priest and Professor of the same Academy; 3dly by Mr. Utzschneider, Counsellor of the Electoral Chamber; 4thly by Mr. George Grumberg, a member of the Academy of Sciences, and Professor of Mathematics. As every thing is juridical in these depositions, it would be useless for me to insist on the weight they must carry with them. These were four pupils, who did not wait to be initiated in the grand mysteries of the Sect to form their judgement on, and to quit the Sect. They [p. 396] were cited at a tribunal to declare all they knew, and they answered with moderation and truth. Their depositions will find a place in the historical part of this work. IX. The Apologies published by some of the leaders of the Sect are also to be classed among the incontrovertible evidence which we have acquired. These gentlemen will not be expected to have aggravated their own wickedness. X. The list would be endless were I to subjoin all the works that have been written against the Sect. But I must distinguish in this place the works of Mr. Hoffman, Professor at the University of Vienna. I am but little acquainted with those of Doctor Zimmerman, though I have been informed by letter, that he furnished many valuable articles in a journal published at Vienna, and chiefly directed against the Sect. I often find Mr. Stark's name mentioned as a strenuous opponent of the Sect. I have seen no publication with his name to it, except an Apology in Answer to the Calumnies of the Sect, which it continues to repeat, notwithstanding the victorious manner in which he has answered them. Among the anonymous writings I find an excellent work entitled the Ultimate fate of the Free-masons (Endliches schicksal des Frey-maurer Ordens). It is a discourse pronounced at the breaking-up of a Freemason's Lodge. The writer of this discourse gives an excellent statement of the reasons why the Lodges should suspend their labours since Illuminism had intruded itself into Masonry.--I believe he would have pronounced this discourse much sooner, had he known that all Lodges were not so pure as his own. I have also perused the Biographical Fragments of the Sieur Bode, a famous Illuminee; these will be very useful in our Historical Volume. As to numberless other works which I have read on the same subject, it will suffice to give the titles of them when quoted. I have said more than enough to show that I am not in the dark with respect to the subject on which I am writing. I could wish to express my gratitude to those virtuous men who, by their correspondence, and the memorials which they have sent me, have greatly advanced my undertaking. But open expressions of such a gratitude would prove fatal to them. To have contributed to the public utility is a sufficient reward for their virtue; and if my work is not so perfect as it ought to be, it arises not from any want of energy in their endeavours. I find myself much against my will obliged to answer certain objections which my Translator has made, and which will, doubtless, be repeated by many other readers, grounded on the work of Mr. Robison, entitled Proof of a Conspiracy against all the Religions and Governments of Europe, &c. &c. That work was published just as this Third Volume was going to the press. Its author had not then met with my two first Volumes; but in a second Edition he is pleased to mention them in his Appendix. I am much flattered by his approbation, heartily congratulate him on the zeal he has himself shown in combating the public enemy, and am happy to see that he has wrought on the best materials. Without knowing it, we have fought for the same cause with [p. 397] the same arms, and pursued the same course; but the public are on the eve of seeing our respective quotations, and will observe a remarkable difference between them. I fear lest we should be put in competition with each other, and the cause of truth suffer in the conflict. I entreat the reader to observe, that these differences arise from the different methods followed by him and myself. Mr. Robison has adopted the easiest, though the most hazardous method. He combines together in one paragraph what his memory may have compiled from many, and sometimes makes use of the expressions of the German author when he thinks it necessary. Beside, he has seen much, and read much, and relates it all together in the paragraphs marked by inverted Commas. The warning he has given in his preface will not suffice to remove the objections of some readers. In some passages he has even adopted as truth certain assertions which the correspondence of the Illuminees evidently demonstrate to have been invented by them against their adversaries, and which in my Historical Volume I shall be obliged to treat in an opposite sense. Nor will I pretend to say, that Illuminism drew its origin from Masonry; for it is a fact demonstrated beyond all doubt, that the founder of Illuminism only became a Mason in 1777, and that two years later than that he was wholly unacquainted with the mysteries of Masonry. [*8] I know perfectly well, that this will not make Illuminism less disastrous; nevertheless I am obliged to differ from Mr. Robison when treating on that subject, as well as on some other articles.--So much for objections; here is my reply. In the first place Mr. Robison and I always agree as to the essential facts and the Conspiracy of the Illuminized Lodges; we also agree on their maxims and degrees; and this must be sufficient to convince the reader. In the next place, in his general view of the Sect he has observed its detestable and most dangerous principles. Like a traveller he has seen the Monstrum horrendum, informe, ingens . . . But he has not described its forms, its manners, and its habits. Nor would it be very prudent to reject his narrative because some few circumstances are not perfectly authenticated, or because here and there some want of order may be observable. In short, if we except one or two letters, which may be said to be translations, all the other quotations (though in the form of letters) cannot be called so, for they are not to be found in the letters of the Illuminees. They are Extracts from different parts, all brought together under one head; Mr. Robison has given them to the public in his own stile, and sometimes makes the Illuminees speak in clearer terms than is done in the Originals. His addition in the Translation of the famous letter from Spartacus to Marius, page 165-6, [*9] has given rise to numberless questions, how the--even d--was expressed in the German text. A parenthesis follows (can this mean death?). I was obliged to answer that the even d--, as well as the parenthesis, were additions; but at the same time that they were not additions contrary to the [p. 398] sense of the letter. I could willingly have attributed these deviations to a difference in the editions of the Original Writings; but a new work must be supposed, as well as new letters, to justify the quotations, and all Germany must have noticed such changes. In the first place, the Court of Bavaria would have protested against such a supposition; as the Original Writings could not have coincided with an edition so dissimilar; next, the Illuminees who have not spoken in such clear language, though clear enough in their letters; in fine, the authors who have combated Illuminism, and whose quotations all exactly agree with the Edition of Munich. The Pages may change in different Editions; but whole Letters and Discourses cannot, especially when the public may, as we have seen above, have access to the Originals. As for myself, whose name cannot be expected to have such authority as Mr. Robison's, I have taken all the precautions of which I felt myself to stand in need. [*10] I never make a quotation but with the Original before me; and when I translate any passage which may stagger the reader, I subjoin the original, that each may explain and verify the text. I follow the same line of conduct when I compare the different testimonies. I never mention a single law in the code without having the original before me, or the practice of it to vouch for my assertion. Hence it will be perceived, that we are not to be put in competition with each other; Mr. Robison taking a general view while I have attempted to descend into particulars: as to the substance we agree. I heartily congratulate him on his zeal in combating the monster; and though we do not agree in certain particularities, we both evince the monstrous nature of the Sect, and the certainty of its horrible Conspiracies. [p. 399] Footnotes ^398:1 The Translator thinks it proper to inform the Reader, that, considering how much the abuse of terms, such as of Philosophy, Reason, &c. &c. has contributed to diffuse the new-fangled doctrines, he has adopted in the present volume (which may be said to be the first methodical work published on the subject of which it treats) the words Illumine, Illuminize, and Illuminization, though Illuminate and Illumination might perhaps be more correct expressions. Every reader will feel, that the illumination of the world, and to illuminate mankind, are objects worthy of the true philosopher. But may the man be ever accurst who shall attempt to illuminize his countrymen, or aim at the illuminization of the world! T. ^398:2 Vol. I. page xxii. ^398:3 Gaultier, Verbo MANICHaeI, Sect. 3. ^398:4 Einige original schriften des Illuminaten Ordens, welche bey dem gewesenen regierungsrath Zwack, durch vorgennommene haus visitation zu Landshut den 11 and 12 Octob. 1786, vorgefunden worden. Auf hochsten befehl seiner churfurstlichen Durchleucht zum druck befordert. Munchen. Gedruckt bey Ant Franz churfl; hof-buchdrucker. ^398:5 Nachrichten von weitern Original schriften, &c. &c. ^398:6 Wer an der aechtheit dieser versammlung einen zweifel tragt, mag sich nur bey den hiesigen geheimen archiv melden, allwo man ihm die urschrifften selbst vorzulegen befehligen ist. Munchen 26 Marz 1787. ^399:7 [p. 399] Philo's Endliche erklarung, &c. Page 96. ^399:8 Original Writings, Vol. I. Let. 6, to Ajax.--Ibid. Let. 36 to M. C. Porcins--and the first Pages of the Critical History of the Degrees. ^399:9 See Page 4, of this Volume. ^399:10 I am also afraid that the difference that exists between the degrees of Rosicrucian, of which Mr. Robison is in possession, and those which I have mentioned, may give rise to argument. I answer, 1st. That I am acquainted with three degrees of Rosicrucians, very different in themselves; 2dly. That the Cathechisms, Questions, and Rituals for the same degree greatly differ in different countries: 3dly. That I have followed the works of Mr. L'Abbe Le Franc, which Mr. Robison has quoted: 4thly. That Mr. Robison allows the degree of Knights of the Sun as described by me to be similar to that which he is in possession of. Since the publication of my Second Volume, I have received an account of the same degree which coincides with what I had said, and this degree is a sufficient ground for all that Mr. Robison or myself have asserted on the attack carried on by Masonry against Religion and Governments. Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford [1798], at sacred-texts.com [p. 400] CHAP. I. Spartacus-Weishaupt, Founder of the Illuminees. THERE sometimes appear men formed with such unhappy dispositions, that we are led to consider them in no other view than as emanations from the evil genius, bereft by the avenging God of the power of doing good. Imbecil in the sphere of wisdom, such men are only efficient in the arts of vice and destruction; they are ingenious in those conceptions, skilful in that cunning, and fruitful in those resources which enable them despotically to reign in the schools of falsehood, depravity, and wickedness. In competition with the Sophisters, these men will surpass them in the arts of exhibiting error in false and delusive colours; of disguising the vicious passions under the mask of virtue; and of clothing impiety in the garb of Philosophy. In the den of conspirators they are pre-eminent by the atrocity of their deeds; they excel in the arts of preparing revolutions, and of combining the downfal of the Altar with that of Empires. If their career be ever impeded, it is only when they approach the paths of virtue and of real science. When Heaven in its wrath permits a being of this species to appear on the earth, it has only to put nations within the sphere of his activity, and it will be awfully avenged. With such qualities, and under such auspices, was born in Bavaria, about the year 1748, ADAM WEISHAUPT, better known in the annals of the sect by the name of SPARTACUS. To the eternal shame of his Serene protector, this impious man, heretofore Professor of Law at the University of Ingolstadt, but now banished from his country as a traitor to his Prince and to the whole universe, peacefully at the court of Ernest Lewis, Duke of Saxe Gotha, enjoys an asylum, receives a pension from the public treasury, and is dignified with the title of Honorary Counsellor to that Prince. An odious phenomenon in nature, an Atheist void of remorse, a profound hypocrite, destitute of those superior talents which lead to the vindication of truth, he is possessed of all that energy and ardour in vice which generates conspirators for impiety and anarchy. Shunning, like the ill-boding owl, the genial rays of the sun, he wraps around him the mantle of darkness; and history shall record of him, as of the evil spirit, only the black deeds which he planned or executed. Of mean birth, his youth was passed in obscurity, and but a single trait of his private life has pierced the cloud in [p. 401] which he had enveloped himself--but it is one of hateful depravity and of the most consummate villany.--Incestuous Sophister! it was the widow of his brother whom he seduced.--Atrocious father! it was for the murder of his offspring that he solicited poison and the dagger.--Execrable hypocrite! he implored, he conjured both art and friendship to destroy the innocent victim, the child whose birth must betray the morals of his father. The scandal from which he shrinks is not that of his crime; it is (he says and writes it himself) the scandal which, publishing of the depravity of his heart, would deprive him of that authority by which, under the cloak of virtue, he plunged youth into vice and error.--Monstrous Sophister! he accuses the devils of not having skreened him from this scandal by those abominations which called the vengeance of the God of Nature on the son of Judah.--Then, impudently daring, he perjures himself; he calls every thing that is sacred to witness, that neither he nor his friends ever knew of the existence of those poisons or secret means of skreening him from infamy, much less that they had ever proposed, sought, or employed them. He challenges, and at length forces, the magistrates to prove the accusation; they produce the letters of the perjured Sophister, and therein we behold him entreating a first, a second, and even a third confidant, to seek, or cause to be sought, and to communicate to him, these horrid arts. We see him recalling promises of three years standing with respect to these means. He complains of the little success of his attempts, he accuses the agents of timidity or of ignorance; he entreats and conjures them to renew their attempts, telling them, that it was not yet too late, but that expedition was necessary. Who can paint the depravity of this single trait. How monstrous the being who could have combined such depravity! That the God who humiliates the Sophister should have permitted this single trait to have been brought to light, will suffice to show how far wickedness may be carried by the man who, with virtue on his tongue, and under the shade of that sacred name, was forming and fanaticising the blood-thirsty legions of a Robespierre. After so shocking an accusation the reader will naturally expect us to produce incontrovertible proofs. We will, therefore, first lay before him the letter of Weishaupt to his adept Hertel; it is the Third Letter in the Second Volume of the Original Writings of the Illuminees in Bavaria. "Now," says Weishaupt to this adept, "let me, under the most profound secrecy, lay open the situation of my heart. It destroys my rest, it render me incapable of every thing. I am almost desperate. My honour is in danger, and I am on the eve of losing that reputation which gave me so great an authority over our people. My sister-in-law is with child. I have sent her to Athens (Munich) to Euriphon, to solicit a marriage licence from Rome. You see how necessary it is that she should succeed, and that without loss of time; every moment is precious. But should she fail, what shall I do?--How shall I restore the honour of a person who is the victim of a crime that is wholly mine? We have already made several attempts to destroy the child; she was determined to undergo all; but Euriphon is too timid. Yet I scarcely see any other expedient. Could I depend on Celse's secrecy (the professor Bader at Munich), he could be of great service [p. 402] to me; he had promised me his aid three years ago. Mention it to him if you think proper. See what can be done. I should be sorry that Cato knew any thing of it, lest he should tell all his friends. If you could extricate me from this unfortunate step, you would restore me to life, to honour, to rest, and to authority (that is over his people). If you cannot, I forewarn you of it, I will hazard a desperate blow, for I neither can nor will lose my honour. I know not what devil". . . . [Here decency obliges us to be silent; but he continues] "As yet nobody knows any thing of it but Euriphon; it is not too late to make an attempt, for she is only in her fourth month, and the worst of it is, that it is a criminal case, and that alone makes the greatest efforts and the most extreme (or boldest) resolution necesssary. Be well and live happier than I do, and do think of some means which can extricate me from this affair. I am yours, &c. SPARTACUS." Notwithstanding his repugnance to let Cato into the secret, Weishaupt is at length obliged to write to him on the subject, and, after repeating that which through decency we have omitted above, this monster of hypocrisy says, "what vexes me the most in all this, is that my authority over our people will be greatly diminished--that I have exposed a weak side, of which they will not fail to advantage themselves whenever I may preach morality, and exhort them to virtue and modesty." [*1] Now let us observe the same Weishaupt barefacedly saying in his apology, "I think and declare before God (and I wish this writing to be looked upon as a most solemn declaration), that in all my life I have never heard of those secret means (of abortion) nor of those poisons; that I have never seen nor had knowledge of any occasion when I or my friends could even have thought of advising, administering, or making any use whatever of them. And this I say in testimony and affirmation of the truth." [*2] It is thus that by the most abominable hypocrisy he sustains a barefaced and detestable perjury. So much for the moral virtue of this man; but our chief object is, to consider him in his character of a Conspirator. Let us then descend into that baleful abyss, and observe him in the schools of impiety, rebellion, and anarchy. Here again he appears to have been ignorant of the gradations of crime, of the space that lies between the slightest deviation from rectitude and the most profound wickedness. Here, scarcely have the magistrates cast their eyes upon him when they find him at the head of a conspiracy which, when compared with those of the clubs of Voltaire and D'Alembert, or with the secret committees of D'Orleans, make these latter appear like the faint imitations of puerility, and show the Sophister and the Brigand as mere novices in the arts of revolution. It is not known, and it would be difficult to discover, whether Weishaupt ever had a master, or whether he is himself the great original of those monstrous doctrines on which he founded his school. There exists, however, a tradition which on the authority of some of his adepts we shall lay before the reader. According to this tradition, a Jutland merchant, who had lived some time in Egypt, began in the year 1771 to overrun Europe, pretending to initiate [p. 403] adepts in the antient mysteries of Memphis. But from more exact information I have learned that he stopped for some time at Malta, where the only mysteries which he taught were the disorganizing tenets of the antient Illuminees, of the adopted slave; and these he sedulously infused into the minds of the people. These principles began to expand, and the island was already threatened with revolutionary confusion, when the Knights very wisely obliged our modern Illuminee to seek his safety in flight. The famous Count (or rather mountebank) Cagliostro is said to have been a disciple of his, as well as some other adepts famous for their Illuminism in the county of Avignon and at Lyons. In his peregrinations, it is said, he met with Weishaupt, and initiated him in his mysteries. If impiety and secrecy could entitle a person to such an initiation, never had any man better claims than Weishaupt. More artful and wicked than Cagliostro, he knew how to direct them among his disciples to very different ends. Whatever may have been the fact with respect to this first master, it is very certain that Weishaupt needed none. In an age when every kind of error had taken root, he did what is naturally to be expected from men who, guided by their unhappy bias, both in religious and political opinions, always select the most abominable. He must have had some notion of the ancient Illuminees, for he adopted their name, and the disorganizing principles of their horrid system. These notions were then , without doubt, by his favorite application to the disorganizing mysteries of Manichaeism, since we may observe him recommending the study of them to his disciples as a preparatory step for, and as having a close connection with, those for which he was preparing them. [*3] But perfect Atheist as he was, and scorning every idea of a God, he soon despised the twofold God of Antient Illuminism, and adopted the doctrines of Manes only in as much as they threatened every government, and led to universal anarchy. He was acquainted with the systems of the modern Sophisters; but, notwithstanding all their democracy, he did not think they had given sufficient latitude to their systems of Liberty and Equality. He only adopted their hatred for God, or pure Atheism. One class led to the destruction of all civil and political laws, the other to the overthrow of all religion; he combined them both, and formed a monstrous digest, whose object was the most absolute, the most ardent, the most frantic vow to overthrow, without exception, every religion, every government, and all property whatsoever. He pleased himself with the idea of a distant possibility that he might infuse the same wish throughout the world; he even assured himself of success. With the talents of a vulgar Sophister such a hope would have been the summit of folly; but with a genius like that of Weishaupt, formed for great crimes, it was the confidence of unlimited wickedness. The Bavarian Sophister knew his powers; he believed no crime impossible; he only sought to combine them all to reduce his systems to practice. The mediocrity of his fortune had obliged him to consecrate the latter years of his education to the study of the laws. Whether by dissimulation he concealed the plans fostered in his breast, [p. 404] or whether he had not as yet digested them all, he however found means of getting himself named to the chair of Laws in the University of Ingolstadt, before he had attained his twenty-eighth year. On the 10th of March, 1778, he writes to Zwack that he was not yet thirty years of age; and in the same letter he informs him, under secrecy, of his future projects on Illuminism, which he had founded two years before. He must have known himself possessed of profound dissimulation; he must have been master of strange resources, to ground his plans for the subversion of all laws throughout all empires, on the very function of public interpreter of the law. It was nevertheless at the college of Ingolstadt that Weishaupt, affecting the greatest zeal for his duty, conceived himself to be admirably for forming and conducting by invisible means the great revolution which he had planned. He justly estimated the influence which his office of teacher gave him over his scholars, and he had the courage to supply in private the deficiency of those lessons which he was obliged to give to them in public. But it would have been too poor a conquest for Anarchy or Impiety to have gained only those who were under the eye of the founder. Weishaupt beheld mankind subject to religious and political laws from pole to pole, and his jealous zeal weighed the means which the saints had employed to extend the faith of Christ. There still existed the scattered remnants of an Order which the imprudent policy of Kings had obliged the Sovereign Pontiff to sacrifice to the machinations of a Philosophism, the professed enemy of both Kings and Pontiffs. Weishaupt knew how to appreciate the support which the laws had acquired from men who were heretofore spread throughout all Catholic countries, and who, in the towns and villages, publicly taught youth, thundered from the pulpit against vice, directed Christians toward the path of virtue, and went to preach the faith of Christ to idolatrous and barbarous nations. He well knew how much empires were indebted to religious Orders, that in preaching the duty which each man owed to his God, strengthened the ties that bound him to his neighbour and to his Prince. Though he in his heart detested the children of Benedict, Francis, or Ignatius, he admired the institutions of these holy founders, and was particularly charmed with those of Ignatius, whose laws directed so many zealous men dispersed throughout the world toward the same object and under one head: he conceived that the same forms might be adopted, though to operate in a sense diametrically opposite. [*4] "What these men have done for the Altar and the Throne (said he to himself) why would not I do in opposition to the Altar and the Throne? With legions of adepts subject to my laws, and by the lure of mysteries, why may not I destroy under the cover of darkness, what they edified in broad day? What Christ even did for God and for Caesar, why shall not I do against God and Caesar, by means of adepts now become my apostles?" In attributing such a wicked emulation to Weishaupt, I will not leave the historian to fruitless conjectures. No, these very wishes in plain language are contained in his confidential letters to his disciples; and he even reproaches [p. 405] them with not imitating the submission of the followers of those holy founders. [*5] His most celebrated adepts have declared, that they had observed him copying them throughout his code; [*6] they must also have remarked, that Weishaupt, in planning his systems according to the forms adopted by those religious founders, had reserved it to himself to add all the artifices which the most infernal policy could suggest. At the actual period when this conspirator formed his plans, he was ignorant of the object of Freemasonry: [*7] He only knew that the fraternity held secret meetings: he observed that they were bound by mysterious ties, and recognized each other for brethren by certain signs and words, whatever might be their country or religion. In his mind, therefore, he combined the plan of a society, which was at once to partake as much as convenient of the government of the Jesuits, and of the mysterious silence and secret conduct of Masonry. Its object was, the propagation of the most Antisocial Systems of ancient Illuminism, and of the most Antireligious Systems of modern Philosophism. Brooding over this disastrous project, Weishaupt cast his eyes on the young pupils whom government had entrusted to his care to form them for magistrates of their country, and defenders of the laws, and he resolved to begin his warfare against both by the perversion of these youths. He beheld in distant succession his first disciples seducing others, those again, subject to his laws, forming further adepts; and thus by degrees he came complacently to view his legions multiplying and spreading from the towns to the country, and resident even in the courts of Princes. He already heard those oaths which, under the secrecy of the Lodges, were to bind the minds and hearts of those new legions who, replete with his disorganizing spirit, were silently to undermine the Altar and the Throne. He calculated the time necesssary, and smiled to think that he would one day have only to give the signal for the general explosion. Scarcely had this modern Eratostratus attained his eight-and-twentieth year, ere he had laid the foundations of those laws which he meant to give to his disorganizing Sect. Though he had not actually written his code, he had arranged it in his mind, and he made his first essay on two of his pupils, one named Massenhausen (whom he surnamed Ajax), about twenty years of age, and afterwards a Counsellor at Burkhausen; the other called Merz (whom he surnamed Tiberius) [*8] nearly of the same age, but whose morals and character proved so abominable, that they made even his vile seducer blush. These two disciples soon vying with their master in impiety, he judged them worthy of being admitted to his mysteries, and conferred on them the highest degree that he had as yet invented. He called them Areopagites, installed himself their chief, and called this monstrous association THE ORDER OF ILLUMINEES. [*9] It was on the first of May, 1776, that the inauguration was celebrated. Let the reader well observe this epoch. It indicates a feeble beginning; it preceded the French Revolution but by a few years; that however was the time when that abominable Sect first started into existence, which was to combine all the errors, all the conspiracies, and all the crimes of the adepts of Impiety, [p. 406] [paragraph continues] Rebellion, or Anarchy, and which, under the name of Jacobin, was to consummate the dreadful Revolution. Such was the origin of that Sect which I had in view when I proclaimed to all nations, and unfortunately with too much truth, "That whatever their government or religion might be, to whatever rank they might belong in civil society, if Jacobinism triumphed all would be overthrown; that should the plans and wishes of the Jacobins be accomplished, their religion with its Pontiffs, their government with its laws, their magistrates and their property, all would be swept away in the common mass of ruin! Their riches and their fields, their houses and their cottages, their very wives and children would be torn from them. You have looked upon Jacobinical faction as exhausting itself in France, when it was only making a sportive essay of its strength." [*10] According to the wishes and intentions of this terrible and formidable Sect, nations, astonished, have yet only seen the first part of the plans formed for that general Revolution which is to beat down every Throne overturn every Altar--destroy all property--blot out every law and conclude by the total dissolution of all society! The omen is fatal; but (more fatal still!) I have numberless proofs to demonstrate the truth of this assertion. With respect to the Conspiracies of Illuminism, I shall draw my proofs from their own code and their archives. I will begin with their code; it will lay open the object, the extent, the manner, the means and inconceivable depth of the Conspiracies of the Sect. This First Part will comprehend the plan of their conspiracies, the extract and analysis of the code of laws which they had constructed for attaining their ends. The Second Part will show their progress and their successes from their first origin, till that period when, powerful in Revolutionary Legions, without leaving their secret dens, they unite and confound themselves with the Jacobins, and in unison with them prosecute that war of desolation which menaces with total ruin the Altar of every God--the Throne of every Monarch--The Law of every Society--and the Property of every Citizen. O! that I could in delineating what the Sect has done, what it is doing, and what it still meditates to do that I could but teach nations and the chiefs of nations what they themselves ought to do, to avert the impending danger; those, I say, who have mistaken these disasters for a sudden explosion, while they are in fact but an essay of the strength of the Sect, and the commencement of their general plan. [p. 407] Footnotes ^406:1 Original Writings, Vol. I. Let. 61, to Cato. ^406:2 Introduction to his Apology, p. 6. ^406:3 See the degree of Directing Illumine, oder Scottischer Ritter (Scotch Knight) page 72. ^406:4 Mirabeau de la Monarchie Prussienne, vol. V. P. 97. ^406:5 Vid. Original Writings, Vol. I. let 27, to Cato. ^406:6 See the Original Writings, Vol. I Instructio pro recipientibus, art. B--Let. 2, to Ajax.--Divers letters to Cato.--Last Observation of Philo. ^406:7 See hereafter the chapter on Masonry illuminized, Vol. IV. ^407:8 [p. 407] Weishaupt, in a letter to Zwack, says, "My three first colleagues were Ajax, you, and Merz." (Let. 15, Feb. 1778). This clearly states, that Merz was the Tiberius who was illuminated with Ajax; for it is clear that Zwack was only initiated ten months after the two adepts Ajax and Tiberius. (See Orig. Writ. Vol. I. Sect. IV.) ^407:9 Orig. Writ. Vol. I. Sect. IV.--Let. 2, to Philip Strozzi. ^407:10 Vol. I, page 23. Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford [1798], at sacred-texts.com [p. 408] CHAP. II. Code of the Illuminees.--General System, and division of the Code. BY the code of the sect of Illuminees I mean the principles and systems which it had formed to itself on Religion and Civil Society, or rather against all Religion and Civil Society whatever; I mean the government and the laws which it has adopted to realize its plans, and to guide the adepts in bringing the whole universe into its systems. This was not so much a code springing from an ardent mind, and an enthusiastic zeal for a great revolution, as the offspring of reflection on the means of rendering it infallible; for no sooner had Weishaupt conceived a plan, than he foresaw the obstacles which might thwart its success. Though he decorated the first pupils whom he had seduced with the title of his profound adepts, yet he did not dare unfold to them the vast extent of his plans. Pleased with having laid the foundation, he did not hurry the elevation of that edifice, which might have been exposed to fall for want of the proper precautions; no, he wished it to be as durable as time itself. For five whole years he meditated; and he foresaw that he should still have to pause for many a tedious day on the means of securing the success of his plans. His plodding head silently ruminated and slowly combined that code of laws or rather of cunning, of artifice, of snares and ambushees by which he was to regulate the preparation of candidates, the duties of the initiated, the functions, the rights, the conduct of the chiefs, and even his own. He watched every means of seduction, weighed and compared those means, tried them one after the other; and when he had adopted any of them would still reserve the power of changing them, in case he should happen to fall upon any that would be more disastrous. Meanwhile his first disciples, now his apostles, gained him many partizans; he seduced many himself, and directed their conduct by letter. His advice was adapted to circumstances, and, artfully husbanding his promises, he kept the minds of his disciples perpetually in suspense as to the last mysteries. To his trusty adepts he promises systems of morality, of education, and of polity, all entirely new; and they might easily surmise that this future code would be no other than that of a morality without restraint, of a religion without a God, and of a polity without laws or any dependence whatsoever; [*1] though he did not dare [p. 409] entirely to throw away the mask. But his laws appeared imperfect, his snares were not sufficiently concealed; and he was convinced that time and experience alone could perfect the work on which he had so long meditated. Such are the colours, at least, in which we see him representing himself when his adepts, impatient to be initiated in the last mysteries, reproach him with the slowness of the proceedings: "It is from time and experience," says he, "that we are to learn. I daily put to the test what I made last year, and I find that my performances of this year are far superior. Give me then time to reflect on what may forward and on what may delay the execution of our plans; to weigh what may be expected of our people left to themselves or led and conducted by us.--Remember that what is done in haste, speedily falls to ruin. Leave me then to myself, let me act alone; and believe me, time and I are worth any other two." [*2] Let not the reader imagine that these meditations of Weishaupt alluded to the of his views; that never varied; the destruction of Religion, the destruction of Society and the civil Laws, the destruction of property,--that was the point at which he always aimed; and this impious man too well knew his crime, not to be alarmed; we see him writing to his confident, "You know the situation in which I stand. I must direct the whole by means of five or six persons. It is absolutely necessary that I should during my life remain unknown to the greater part of the adepts themselves.--I am often overwhelmed with the idea that all my meditations, all my services and toils are perhaps only twisting a rope or planting a gallows for myself; that the indiscretion or imprudence of a single individual may overturn the most beautiful edifice that ever was reared." [*3] At other times wishing to appear above such fears, but still reproaching the adepts with want of caution, he says, "If our affairs already go on so ill, the whole will soon be undone: the fault will be thrown upon me, and, as author of every thing, I shall be the first sacrificed. Yet that is not what frightens me; I know how to take every thing on my own score; but if the imprudence of the Brethren is to cost me my life, let me at least not have to blush before men of reflection, nor to reproach myself with an inconsiderate and rash conduct." [*4] Thus does every motive stimulate this famous Conspirator to transfuse into his code every precaution that could at the same time skreen him from condign punishment, and secure the success of his plots. At length, after five years meditation on his side, and numerous consultations with his trusty adepts, particularly with Philo, or the Baron Knigge, who acts a very exalted part in Illuminism, Weishaupt had regulated the mode of his mysteries, and had digested the code of his Sect, that is to say, the principles, the laws, and government adopted by the Illuminees to accomplish the grand object of their Conspiracy. Before we lead our readers through the immense labyrinth of this code, let us give a general idea of the system which stimulated its author to the formation of those laws. The more we meditate on that part of the code which we shall lay before our readers when we come to treat of the mysteries of Illuminism, the more [p. 410] clearly we observe Weishaupt adopting the principles of Equality and of Liberty, (propagated by modern Philosophism) in order to present them in a new light, and to lead his disciples to the ultimate consequences of the most absolute Impiety and Anarchy. The modern Sophisters, some following Voltaire, others Rousseau, had begun by saying, that all men were equal and free; and they had concluded with respect to Religion, that nobody, though speaking in the name of a God who reveals himself, had the right of prescribing rules to their faith. The authority of revelation being cast aside, they left no other basis for Religion to rest upon, than the Sophistry of a reason the perpetual prey of our passions. They had annihilated Christianity in the minds of their adepts. With respect to Governments they had also asserted, that all men were equal and free, and they had concluded that every citizen had an equal right to form the laws, or to the title of Sovereign; this consequence abandoning all authority to the capricious fluctuations of the multitude, no government could be legitimate but that founded on Chaos, or the volcanic explosions of the democratic and sovereign populace. Weishaupt, reasoning on the same principles, believed both the Sophisters and the Democratic Populace to be too timid in drawing their inferences, and the following may be said to be the essence of all his mysteries. "Liberty and Equality are the essential rights that man in his original and primitive perfection received from nature. Property struck the first blow at Equality; political Society, or Governments, were the first oppressors of Liberty; the supporters of Governments and property are the religious and civil laws; therefore, to reinstate man in his primitive rights of Equality and Liberty, we must begin by destroying all Religion, all civil society, and finish by the destruction of all property." Had true Philosophy but gained admittance to these lodges of Illuminism, how clearly would she have demonstrated the absurdity of each and all of these principles, and the extravagance and wickedness of such consequences, both to the master and his adepts! She would have shewn, that the rights and laws of primitive man alone upon earth, or parent of a scanty generation, neither were nor ought to be the rights and laws of man living on an inhabited globe. She would have proved, that Nature, when she ordained that man should increase and multiply on this earth, and that he should cultivate it, clearly announced that his posterity were hereafter to live under the empire of social laws. She would have observed, that without property this earth would have remained uncultivated and uninhabited; that without religious and civil laws the same earth would have only nurtured straggling hordes of vagabonds and savages. Then would our Bavarian Illuminee have concluded, that his Equality and Liberty, far from being the essential rights of man in the state of perfection, would only be the instruments of his degradation, and assimilate him to the beasts of the earth, if they were to be incompatible with Property, Religion, and Society. But true Philosophy was an alien to his school; and Weishaupt, with his detestable genius formed for error, applauds [p. 411] the sophism, makes it the basis of his system, and the ultimate secret of his mysteries. I am not simply to prove that such is the grand object of the Conspiracy, and of the ultimate revolution which he is preparing with all his adepts. Were that my only task, I should cite the blessings which the hierophant of Illuminism pours out on those hordes that roam without laws or society, and the curses which he vents against those men who, fixing their abodes, name chiefs and constituted states. The very menaces of the teacher unfold the whole of the Conspiracy. "Yes, princes and nations shall disappear from off the face of the earth; yes, a time shall come when man shall acknowledge no other law but the great book of nature: This revolution shall be the work of the SECRET SOCIETIES, and that is one of our grand mysteries. [*5] This single passage of the code is sufficient to demonstrate both the object of the Conspiracy and the extent of the projects of the sect; but though the Conspiracy should be clearly proved, still that would be doing little for the public good. Instead of a terrible and formidable Sect, nations and chiefs of nations might mistake the Illuminees for a band of senseless madmen, plodding without means a chimerical Revolution; therefore little to be feared, and too despicable to deserve notice. Thus would wickedness find a cloak in its excesses; the Sect would prosecute its hellish plots more actively, more confidently, and more successfully, merely because their object was supposed impossible. Society would be dissolved; our laws, our religion, and our property, would be wrested from us, because we believed them proof against any attempt. Nations would tranquilly slumber on the brink of the precipice, and be plunged into destruction while they considered the fatal cause as the delusion of delirium, and smiled on the plots of Illuminism. And its founder foresaw this: for he says to his adepts, "Let the laughers laugh, let the scoffers scoff; he that compares the past with the present, will see that nature continues its course without the possibility of diverting it. Its progress is imperceptible to the man who is not formed to observe it; but it does not escape the attention of the Philosopher." [*6] Society then calls upon me to develop more than the existence, or even the extent of the plots of the Sect--I say, it calls on me loudly to proclaim the dangers which threaten us; yes, the evils which threaten all society must be clearly shown. A manner of proceeding and an artful cunning big with crime, which will speedily plunge nations into those disasters which they may believe chimerical, is to be clearly ascertained. I have to unfold the whole of a system, an entire code, in which each institute, each maxim, each regulation, is a new step towards a universal revolution which shall strike society a mortal blow. I am not then about to inform each citizen that his religion, his country, his property, that every society, people, or nation, are menaced; unfortunately that would be a task too easily performed. But I am bound to say, "In this horrible plot, such are the dangers which threaten your country, and such the perils that hang over your persons." I must show extensive resources combined with consummate villainy, where you imagined that nothing existed but the delirium of modern Philosophism, destitute of means. [p. 412] Weishaupt, like yourselves, had foreseen numerous obstacles to his conspiracy; and it appears that he had even exaggerated them. That for which his most famous adepts seem to despise their countrymen, should be mentioned here as redounding to their honour. Weishaupt, surrounded by the faithful Bavarians, faithful to their God and to their country (rather speculating on the human heart from his books, than closely observing men in the common intercourse of life), was not aware of how very much Philosophism had forwarded his systems. [*7] The generation which had attained the age of manhood appeared too much infected with the antiquated ideas on religion and government. But, unfortunately, facts soon undeceived him; and this error only served, by deferring his hopes, to turn his mind to farther precautions and meditations, which sooner or later were to render his success infallible. He would say to himself, he would say to his trusty brethren, "According to my views, I cannot employ men as they are; I must form them; each class of my Order must be a preparatory school for the next; and all this must necessarily be the work of time." [*8] But to accelerate the time he cast his eyes on that class of young men, which, just entering the world, easily fall a prey to error, because at that age they are under the influence of their passions. I shall hereafter show what it was that both shortened the time, and abridged their education, in presenting him with whole legions of adepts ready formed to his mysteries. It is first necessary, however, that the reader should be acquainted with the profundity of his system; because, had the French Revolution not taken place, that system would alone have sufficed to render it certain and infallible; for, could the French Revolution be done away at the present moment, and the ancient regimen be restored, this code would furnish Illuminism with all the means of effectuating one that should be still more disastrous. Let us then study it, let us dissipate the cloud in which it is enveloped. Reader, your own interest requires that you should follow our steps; and observe all the snares that have been laid for you; see with what art its disciples are beguiled, with what precaution it chooses, calls, and disposes its adepts. Its proceedings appear indeed to be slow, but they are nevertheless sure. It seems to exhaust all its art to acquire a single proselyte, but the same allurements attract whole legions. Its springs are secret, but the reader must know their power and with what constancy they move toward and direct the common ruin. He has seen the people agitated, animated, and even misled to ferocity; but he must also be informed how those adepts were created who fanaticised the people and rendered them ferocious. Weishaupt lays down as an invariable and infallible principle, that "the grand art of rendering any revolution whatsoever certain--is to enlighten the people;--and to enlighten them is, insensibly to turn the public opinion to the adoption of those changes which are the given object of the intended revolution. "When that object cannot be without exposing him that has conceived it to public vengeance, he must know how to propagate his opinion IN SECRET SOCIETIES. [p. 413] "When the object is an universal Revolution, all the members of these societies, aiming at the same point, and aiding each other, must find means of governing invisibly, and without any appearance of violent measures, not only the higher and more distinguished class of any particular state, but men of all stations, of all nations, and of every religion--Insinuate the same spirit every where--In silence, but with the greatest activity possible, direct the scattered inhabitants of the earth toward the same point." This is what he calls the grand problem on the polity of states, on which he grounds the force of secret societies, and on which the empire of his Illuminism was to rest. [*9] "This empire once established by means of the union and multitude of the adepts, let force succeed to the invisible power. Tie the hands of those who resist; subdue and stifle wickedness in the germ;" that is to say, crush those whom you have not been able to convince. [*10] He that teaches such doctrines is not to be looked on as a weak enemy. When Weishaupt reserved them for his mysteries, as well as the revelation of his ultimate object, he knew too well that they were only fitted for men who had long been trained to view them as the lessons of nature and of Philosophy, and should he meet with any who had anticipated them, it would only abridge their novitiate. But he needed nothing less than a whole generation. It was therefore to multiply the number of adepts, to dispose them by insensible degrees to receive his doctrines; by an invisible hand to direct their ideas, their wishes, their actions, and their combined efforts, that the code of laws which he framed for Illuminism constantly tended. According to these laws, the sect is divided into two grand classes, and each of these again subdivided into lesser degrees proportionate to the progress of the adepts. The first class is that of PREPARATION. It contains four degrees, those of Novice, of Minerval, of Minor Illuminee or Illuminatus Minor, and of Major Illuminee or Illuminatus Major. Some intermediary degrees belong to the class of PREPARATION, which may be called of Intrusion; such are those which the sect have borrowed from Freemasonry as a means of propagation. Of these masonic degrees the code of Illuminees admit the three first without any alteration: it adapts more particularly to the views of the sect the degree of Scotch Knight as an ultimate preparation for its mysteries, and it is stiled the degree of Directing Illuminee or Illuminatus Dirigens. The second class is that of the MYSTERIES, and this is subdivided into the lesser and greater mysteries. The lesser comprehend the priesthood and administration of the sect, or the degrees of Priests and of Regents or Princes. In the greater mysteries are comprized the two degrees of Magi or Philosopher, and of the Man King. The Elect of the latter compose the council and the degree of Areopagites. [*11] In all these classes, and in every degree, there is a part of the utmost consequence, and which is common to all the Brethren. It is that employment known in the code by the appellation of Brother Insinuator or Recruiter. [*12] The [p. 414] whole strength of the Sect depends on this part; it is that which furnishes members to the different degrees; and Weishaupt, well knowing the importance of the task, turned all his genius toward it. Let us therefore begin by directing our attention to the discovery of it. Footnotes ^414:1 Original Writings, Vol. I. Let. to Marius and Cato. ^414:2 Original Writings, Vol. I. Letters 3, 4, 47, 60 &c to Marius and Cato. ^414:3 Original Writings, Vol. I. Lett. 11 and 25, to Cato. ^414:4 Let. 22, to Cato. ^414:5 See hereafter the Discourse on the Mysteries. ^414:6 See hereafter the Discourse on the Mysteries. ^414:7 See the Last Observations of Philo. ^414:8 Original Writings, Vol. I. Let. to Cato. ^414:9 See the Discourse on the Mysteries. ^414:10 Ibid. ^414:11 See the Original Writings, Chap., II. Part II. page 8. and the last Observations of Philo, page 89, &c. &c. ^414:12 This is not a term of my invention; it really is to be found in the code. Insinuator or Anwerber (signifying Recruiter) are the two words generally made use of to express this character. Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford [1798], at sacred-texts.com [p. 415] CHAP. III. First Part of the Code of the Illuminees.--Of the Brother Insinuator, or the Recruiter. BY the appellation of Brother Insinuator, is to be understood the Illuminee whose peculiar office is to make proselytes for the Sect. Some brethren were more particularly instructed for that end; they might, indeed, be called the Apostles or Missionaries of the Order, being those whom the superiors sent to the different towns and provinces, and even into distant countries, to propagate its doctrines and to establish new Lodges. These had received, in addition to the common rules, farther instructions peculiar to the higher degrees. "These (as Weishaupt writes) may sometimes be the most imbecile, and at other times the most ingenious of the Brotherhood." From the former he can depend on a blind obedience to the rules he lays down, which are never to be deviated from; and with respect to the latter, provided they be zealous and punctual, should they even transgress any of the laws, it would not be in such a manner as to commit either their own safety or that of the Order; and they would soon make amends for their indiscretion by some new artifice. But, whatever may be the sense of the Illuminee, he is obliged once or twice in his life to act the part of Brother Insinuator, and that with a certain success, by the acquisition of two or three proselytes, under pain of perpetually remaining in the lower degrees. Some Brethren of high rank may have been dispensed from this formality; but as to the generality of them there exists a positive law on that point. [*1] To stimulate the zeal of the Brethren, the Insinuator is by the laws of the code established superior over every novice that he has gained to the Order: It is expressed as follows: "Every Illuminee may form to himself a petty empire; and from his littleness, emerge to greatness and power." [*2] Such then is the first duty imposed upon every Illuminee for the propagation of the Sect; and this is the part which first claims our attention, in order that we may be able to form an idea of the immensurable powers of Weishaupt for seduction. This part may be said to be subdivided into three. The rules laid down are, first, those which are to guide the Brother Insinuator in the choice of persons to be admitted or excluded; then follow those which are to teach him how to entice into the order those persons whom he has judged proper for it; [p. 416] and lastly come those rules and arts by which novices are to be formed, and even involved in Illuminism before they are officially admitted. In order to judge of the qualifications of the persons whom he may enlist, every Illuminee is to begin by procuring tablets, which he is to keep in the form of a Journal; and this is his Diary. Assiduously prying into every thing that surrounds him, he must vigilantly observe all persons with whom he becomes acquainted, or whom he meets in company, without exception of relations, friends, enemies, or entire strangers; he must endeavour to discover their strong and their weak side; their passions and prejudices; their intimacies, and above all, their actions, interests, and fortune; in a word, every thing relating to them: and the remarks of every day he must enter in his Diary. A twofold advantage is to be reaped from these particulars of information; first, by the Order in general and its superiors; secondly, by the adept himself. Twice every month he will make a general statement of his observations, and he will transmit it to his superiors. By these means the Order will be informed what men, in every town or village, are friendly or inimical to it. The means of gaining over the one or destroying the other will naturally occur. With respect to the Insinuator, he will learn how to judge of those who are proper persons to be received or rejected, and he will carefully insert his reasons for the admission or rejection of those persons in his monthly statements. [*3] The Recruiting Brother will carefully guard against giving the most distant hint that he is an Illuminee. This law is peremptory for the Brethren, but more particularly for all the Insinuators, whose success may often essentially depend on it. It is to them that the legislator so strongly recommends all that exterior of virtue and of perfection, that care of shunning all public scandals which might deprive them of their ascendancy over the minds of those whom they seek to entice into the Order. [*4] The law expressly says, "Apply yourselves to the acquiring of interior and exterior perfection;" but lest they should conceive that this perfection even hinted at the mastering of their passions, and at renouncing the pleasures of the world, he adds, "Attend particularly to the art of dissembling and of disguising your actions, the better to observe those of others, and to penetrate into their inmost thoughts. "Die kunst zu erlernen sich zu verstellen, andere zu beobachten, and aus zu forschen." It is for that reason that these three great precepts are to be found in the summary of the Code: HOLD THY TONGUE--BE PERFECT--DISGUISE THYSELF--almost following each other in the same page, and serving as an explanation of each other. [*5] Having made himself perfect master of these precepts, and particularly of the last, the Insinuator is next to turn his attention to those persons whom he may admit or ought to reject. He is not to admit into the Order either Pagans or Jews; but he is equally to reject all religious; and above all to shun the Ex-Jesuits as he would the plague. Ordens geistliche durfen nie aufgenommen werden, und die Ex-Jesuiten soll man wie die pest fliehen. [*6] The cause of such exclusions is obvious. To speak of religion, and admit, without any precaution, Jews, Turks, and Pagans, would be too open a [p. 417] manifestation of what their religion was; and not to reject religious, would be exposing themselves to be betrayed by their own adepts. Unless they gave evident signs of a sincere amendment, all indiscreet talkers were to be rejected; and also those men whose pride, or headstrong, interested, and inconstant minds denoted that it would be impossible to infuse into them that zeal so necessary for the order; all those again, whose drunken excesses might injure that reputation of virtue which the Order was to acquire; all those, in short, whose meanness and grossness of manners would render them too untractable to give hope for their ever becoming pliant and useful. [*7] "Leave those brutes, those clownish and thickheaded fellows!" he exclaims in his Chapter on Exclusions; but, though he excluded these thickheaded fellows, Weishaupt was aware that there existed a good sort of being which some might call stupid, but who are not to be told so, as advantage may be taken of their stupidity. Such were, for example, a Baron D'Ert, and many others, who holding a certain rank in the world, though destitute of common sense, have at least their riches to recommend them. "These are a good sort of beings," says our illuminizing legislator; "they are necessary beings. They augment our number and fill our coffers, augent numerum et aerarium. Courage then! and make these gentry swallow the bait; but beware of to them our secrets; For this species of adept must always be persuaded that the degree they are in is the highest. [*8] Indeed, there is a sort of half exclusion for princes. The Code ordains that they shall seldom be admitted, and even when they are, shall scarcely ever rise beyond the degree of Scotch Knight; or, in other words, they are never to pass the threshold of the mysteries. Hereafter we shall see the Legislator finding an expedient for introducing them beyond that degree, but still without giving them any further insight into the mysteries; [*9] and being careful to hide from them certain laws of the Order. [*10] I cannot take upon myself to say, whether a similar expedient had been found as an exception to the general rule which excluded women; but it is certain, that this law was, during a long time at least, only provisional; and many of the brethren sought to revoke it. Freemasonry had its female adepts, and the Illuminees wished to have theirs. The plan is written in Zwack's own hand-writing, and he was the most intimate friend and confidant of Weishaupt, in short, his incomparable man. It is couched in the following terms: "Plan for an Order of Women.--This Order shall be subdivided into two classes, each forming a separate society, and having a different secret. The first shall be composed of virtuous women; the second, of the wild, the giddy, and the voluptuous, auschveifenden. "Both classes are to be ignorant that they are under the direction of men. The two superiors are to be persuaded that they are under a mother Lodge of the same sex, which transmits its orders; though in reality these orders are to be transmitted by men. "The Brethren who are intrusted with this superintendance shall forward their instructions without making themselves known. They shall conduct the [p. 418] first, by promoting the reading of good books, but shall form the latter to the arts of secretly gratifying their passions, durch begnugung ihrer leidenschaften im verborgenen." A preliminary discourse prefixed to this plan points out the object and future services of these illuminized sisters. "The advantages which the real Order would reap from this female Order would be, first, the money which the sisterhood would pay at their initiation; and, secondly, a heavy tax upon their curiosity, under the supposition of secrets that are to be learned. And this association might moreover serve to gratify those brethren who had a turn for sensual pleasure." [*11] A list and description of eighty-five young ladies of Manheim accompanied this project of Zwack, very properly surnamed the Cato of Illuminism; from among whom, in all probability, the founders of these two classes were to be chosen. Circumstances not having favoured our modern Cato's views, we observe several other adepts proposing similar plans. An assessor of the Imperial Chamber at Wetzlaar of the name of Dittfurt, known among the Illuminees by that of Minos, and who rose to the degree of Regent, and to the dignity of Provincial, seemed to dispute the honor of this invention, both with Brother Hercules and even with Cato himself: We must allow, at least, that nobody was more anxious for the execution of the project than he was. He had already submitted his ideas to the Baron Knigge, and he applies anew to Weishaupt. He even despairs of ever bringing men to the grand object of the order without the support of the female adepts. Indeed, so ardent is his zeal, that he makes an offer of his own wife and his four daughters-in-law to be the first adepts. The eldest was exactly the person for the philosophized sisterhood; she was four-and-twenty years of age, and with respect to religion her ideas were far above those of her sex; they were modelled on her father's. He had attained to the degrees of Regent and Prince of the Illuminees, and she would have been Regent and Princess. In the higher mysteries, together with Ptolemy's wife, we should have seen the one corresponding with her father, the other with her husband. These illuminized Princesses would be the only two persons of the order who should know that they were all under the direction of men. They would preside over the trials and receptions of Minervals, and would initiate those whom they judged worthy into the grand projects of the sisterhood for the reform of governments and the happiness of mankind. [*12] But, notwithstanding all the plans and zeal of the Brethren, it does not appear that the legislator ever consented to the establishment of the Sisterhood. Yet he supplied the want of such an institution by secret instructions which he gave the Regents on the means of making the influence of women over men subservient to the order, without initiating them in any of the secrets. He says, that the fair sex having the greatest part of the world at their disposition, "no study was more worthy of the adept than the art of flattery in order to gain them; that they were all more or less led by vanity, curiosity, the pleasures or the love of novelty; that it was on that side they were to be attacked, and by that they were to be rendered serviceable to the order." [*13] He nevertheless [p. 419] continued to exclude great talkers and women from all the degrees, nor was the sixth article of his instructions for the Insinuator rescinded. Notwithstanding all these exclusions, the legislator leaves a sufficient scope wherein the Insinuator may exercise his zeal. He recommends generally young men of all stations from eighteen to thirty; but more particularly those whose educations were not completed, either because he thought they would more easily imbibe his principles, or would be more grateful and more zealous for doctrines for which they were indebted solely to him. [*14] But this preference is not an exclusion for men of a age, provided they are not past service, and are already imbued with the principles of Illuminism. [*15] This, however, chiefly regards those persons whose rank in life can give consequence and afford protection to the order. The Recruiters are particularly instructed to insinuate themselves into the good opinion of such persons, and if possible to entice them into the Order. There is yet another species of men, who have speech as it were at command; such are attornies, counsellors, and even physicians. "Those are worth having," says Weishaupt; "but they are sometimes real devils, so difficult are they to be led; they however are worth having when they can be gained over. [*16] The Insinuator is also to admit artists, mechanics of all professions, painters, engravers, white-smiths and black-smiths; but above all booksellers, those who keep post-horses, and school-masters. Hereafter the reader will see the use for which these men were intended. [*17] To yet another class of men our legislator often calls the attention of the Insinuator: "Seek me out, for example," says Weishaupt, "the dexterous and dashing youths. We must have adepts who are insinuating, intriguing, full of resource, bold and enterprising; they must also be flexible and tractable, obedient, docile, and sociable. Seek out also those who are distinguished by their power, nobility, riches, or learning, nobiles, potentes, divites, doctos, quaerite--Spare no pains, spare nothing in the acquisition of such adepts. If heaven refuse its aidance, conjure hell. "Flectere si nequeas superos, Acheronta moveto." [*18] With respect to religions, he prefers the disciples of Luther and Calvin to the Roman Catholics, and greatly prefers the former to the latter. This distinction should alone suffice to open the eyes of many who wish to persuade themselves that the whole of the revolutionary fury is aimed at the Roman Catholic religion. This motley crew certainly did the Catholics the honour of directing their shafts more pointedly at them, as strenuous opponents of their impiety and of their religious and civil anarchy; but was it to preserve the Protestant religion that Weishaupt gives them such a preference, in hopes of making them subservient to his plots? That he did give such a preference cannot be doubted, when we see him expressly writing to an adept whom he had commissioned to look out for a person proper to be received into the higher mysteries and to found a new colony of Illuminees--were this man a Protestant I should like him much better.--Ware es ein Protestant, [p. 420] so ware es mir um so Lieber. [*19] Weishaupt's most famous adept constantly manifests the same predilection; he even wishes to retrench certain parts of the mysteries that he may not alarm the Catholics, and seems always to hint at Frederic the IId's saying, We Protestants go on brisker. [*20] Most certainly this proves beyond a possibility of doubt, that the destruction of all Protestant laws, whether civil or religious, had place in their plans. Nor were the Protestants of Germany the dupes of such a policy, as many of the most determined antagonists of Illuminism were of that religion. Further, he wishes to entice men into his order who have fixed residences in towns, such as merchants and canons, who might assiduously propagate his doctrines, and establish them in their neighbourhoods. [*21] The Recruiter must use every art (for an obvious reason) to engage schoolmasters, and to insinuate his doctrines into, and gain adepts in the military academies, and other places of education; he is even to attempt the seduction of the superiors of ecclesiastical seminaries. [*22] "He will spare no trouble to gain the Prince's officers, whether presiding over provinces, or attending him in his councils. He that has succeeded in this has done more," says the code, "than if he had engaged the Prince himself. [*23] In fine, the Provincial, or the chief Insinuator, is to recruit every thing that can be tainted with Illuminism, or can be serviceable to its cause." [*24] The following extraordinary instructions are also given by Weishaupt respecting the choice of adepts: "Above all things (he says to his Insinuators) pay attention to the figure, and select the well-made men and handsome young fellows. They are generally of engaging manners and nice feelings. When properly formed, they are the best adapted for negotiations; for first appearances prepossess in their favour. It is true, they have not the depth that men of more gloomy countenances often have. They are not the persons to be entrusted with a revolt, or the care of stirring up the people; but it is for that very reason that we must know how to chuse our agents. I am particularly fond of those men whose very soul is painted in their eyes, whose foreheads are high, and whose countenances are open. Above all, examine well the eyes, for they are the very mirrors of the heart and soul. Observe the look, the gait, the voice. Every external appearance leads us to distinguish those who are fit for our school." [*25] "Select those in particular who have met with misfortunes, not from accidents, but by some act of injustice; that is to say, in other words, the DISCONTENTED; for such are the men to be called into the bosom of Illuminism, as into their proper asylum." [*26] Let not the reader already exclaim, How deep are the views of this illuminizing Sophister? How has he foreseen every point! With what discernment does he lay his snares to entrap those who are to be the future agents of his plots! The reader has as yet seen merely a schedule of those persons who may be admitted or rejected; but that does not sufficiently secure the order with respect to the elections which the Insinuator may have made. Before he undertakes the initiation of any person whom he may have thought [p. 421] proper, he is to make a statement from his diary of every thing that he may have observed with respect to his morals, opinions, conduct, and even of his connections in life. He is to submit this statement to his superiors, who will compare it with the notes they are already in possession of, or may acquire from other adepts, respecting the candidate, or even with a new statement, in case they judge the last to be insufficient. Even when the choice made by the Insinuator is approved of, all is not settled; the superiors have to determine which of the Insinuators is to be entrusted with the care of enticing the approved person into the Order: for all this is foreseen in the code. It is not allowed to all the brethren to exercise promiscuously so important a trust among the prophane, though they may have pointed out the person proper for reception. The young adept is not to measure his strength with the man who has the advantage over him in years and experience, nor is the tradesman to undertake the magistrate. The superior is to name the most proper Insinuator, judging from the circumstances, age, merits, dignities, or talents of the future candidate. [*27] At length, when the mission is given, the Insinuator begins to lay his snares.--Such is the second part of this extraordinary functionary, and all his subsequent steps are regulated by the code. Candidate, in the ordinary acceptation of the word, means a person who has shown a desire or taken some steps into some order, or to acquire some dignity. In Illuminism it means the person on whom the Order has fixed its attention. It often happens, that the candidate is ignorant of the very existence of the sect. It is the Insinuator's business to inspire him with the wish of entering it. To accomplish this grand object, two different methods are inculcated. The first is for the Insinuator who has some candidate in view remarkable for his science or of a certain age. The second, for him who is entrusted with young men from eighteen to thirty, and who are susceptible of a second education. A third method was proposed for workmen, and those clownish fellows whose education had been but little attended to. We may observe Weishaupt consulting with his confidant Zwack on this part of the code; but whether it was never digested, or that he saw the Insinuators could easily supply the defect, no further mention is made of the third method. Let us then examine the essence of the first two. To exemplify the first method, let us suppose one of those men who have gone through a complete course of modern Philosophism, who, should they not scoff at Christianity, would at least hesitate at every thing which is called religion; for the code forewarns the Insinuator, that his efforts would be vain should he attempt to seduce of another stamp, men of sound judgment, and who would never be partizans of doctrines which could not endure the light of broad day. But when he shall have discovered one of the former who has already pretty well imbibed the principles of the sect, he will assume the character of a Philosopher well versed in the mysteries of antiquity. He will have little difficulty in acting such a part, as he will find ample instructions in the code. To follow those instructions faithfully, he must begin "by descanting on the supreme felicity of being versed in sciences which few [p. 422] can approach, of walking in the paths of light while the vulgar are groping in darkness. He must remark, that there exist doctrines solely transmitted by secret traditions, because they are above the comprehension of common minds. In proof of his assertions he will cite the Gymnosophists in the Indies, the Priests of Isis in Egypt, and those of Eleusis and the Pythagorean school in Greece." He will select certain sentences from Cicero, Seneca, Aristides, and Isocrates; and, lest he should ever be taken unawares, he will learn those by heart which the legislator has carefully inserted in the code. Though it would be very easy to demonstrate from those very authors, that the ancient mysteries laid down no fixed principles on the important points of the Providence of God, and of the origin and order of the universe, the Insinuator is nevertheless to quote those texts to prove that there exists a secret doctrine on these objects, and above all a doctrine calculated to render life more agreeable, and pain more supportable; and to enlarge our ideas on the majesty of God. "Let him add, that all the sages of antiquity were acquainted with these doctrines; let him insist on the uncertainty that man is in with respect to the nature of the soul, its immortality, and its future destiny. He will then sound his candidate, to know whether he would not rejoice at having some satisfactory answers on objects of such great importance. At the same time he will hint that he has had the happiness of being initiated into these doctrines, and that, should the candidate wish it, he would do his best to procure him the same felicity; but that it was a science gradually imparted, and that certain men possessed the talent of guiding him from a distance, of leading him to the discovery of this new world, and that without being ever in his presence. [*28] When the Insinuator has by such language succeeded in exciting the curiosity of his candidate, he must then ascertain his opinions on some particular articles. He will propose the discussion of certain questions in writing, and of certain principles, as the groundwork on which they are in future to proceed. The code does not determine what these questions are to be, because they vary according to the political and religious dispositions which the Insinuator may have observed in the candidate. Should these dissertations noway agree with the principles of the sect, the Insinuator will abandon his prey. Should the sophisticated candidate, or the man of importance, be found properly disposed, he will be admitted to the very threshold of the mysteries. The Insinuator will simply explain the inferior degrees to him, and mention the divers trials which the order has dispensed with in consideration of his merit. [*29] Notwithstanding the artifice observable in this method, it is still reserved for those who need only to be acquainted with Illuminism to adopt its tenets. But should the Insinuator be entrusted with a young candidate, or with one whose principles noway coincide with those of the sect, and who is yet to be formed; it is then that Weishaupt developer that immense theory of art and cunning by which he is insensibly to ensnare his victims. "Let your first care," he says to the Insinuators, "be to gain the affection, the confidence, and the [p. 423] esteem of those persons whom you are to entice into the Order--let your whole conduct be such, that they shall surmise something more in you than you wish to show--hint that you belong to some secret and powerful society excite little by little, and not at once, a wish in your candidate to belong to a similar society--Certain arguments and certain books which the Insinuator must have, will greatly contribute to raise such a wish; such are, for example, those which treat of the union and strength of associations." The Legislator then carefully adds a list of those books, and the Order charges itself with the care of furnishing a certain number of them to the adepts. The works of Meiners, and particularly of Bassadows, are frequently recommended by Weishaupt, as the best fitted to inspire their readers with the love and principles of secret societies. But nothing can equal the art with which he himself has drawn up the reasons, by the help of which the Insinuator is to persuade his young candidate of the pretended necessity for these mysterious associations. "One represents, for example," says the code, "a child in the cradle; one speaks of its cries, its tears, its weakness--One remarks how this child, abandoned to itself, is entirely helpless; but that by the help of others it acquires strength--One shows how the greatness of Princes is derived from the union of their subjects--One exalts the advantages of the state of society over the state of nature--Then one touches on the art of knowing and directing mankind--How easily, you will say, could one man of parts lead hundreds, even thousands, if he but knew his own advantages. This is evidently proved by the organization of armies, and the amazing power which princes derive from the union of their subjects." After having descanted on the advantages of society in general, touch upon the defects of civil society, and say how little relief is to be obtained even from one's best friends,--and how very necessary it would be to support each other in these days. Add, that men would triumph even over heaven were they but united--That it is their disunion which subjects them to the yoke.--This is to be explained by the fable of the wolf and the two dogs, the latter of whom could only be vanquished by the former after he had parted them; and by many other examples of the same kind which the Insinuator will collect. [*30] As a proof of what great and important things secret societies can effectuate, he will adduce the examples of the Freemasons, of the mysterious societies of antiquity, and even of the Jesuits. He will assert, that all the great events of this world are dependent on hidden causes, which these secret societies powerfully influence; he will awake in the breast of his pupil the desire of secretly reigning, of preparing in his closet a new constitution for the world, and of governing those who think they govern us. [*31] "When you shall have got thus far," says the code, "begin to show (as it were ) that you are not entirely ignorant of those secrets; throw out some half sentences which may denote it. Should your candidate take the hint, press him, and return to the charge, until you see him betray symptoms of a desire instantaneously to unite with such a society. [p. 424] "The Insinuator, however, who has thus far succeeded in inspiring his pupil with such a wish, has not played off every engine with which the code has furnished him. To sound the very bottom of his mind, he will pretend to consult him as if he had been entrusted with certain secrets, he will make objections on the secrecy of these societies; but should they make too much impression he will resolve them himself. At other times, to stimulate the curiosity of his pupil, he will hold a letter in his hand written in cypher, or he will leave it half open on his table, giving his candidate sufficient time to observe the cypher, and then shut it up with all the air of a man who has important correspondences to keep secret. At other times studying the connections and actions of his pupil, he will tell him of certain circumstances which the young man will think he has learned by means of these secret societies, from whom nothing is hidden, though they are concealed from all the rest of the world." [*32] These artifices may be greatly abridged, according as the friendship or communicative disposition of the candidate shall have laid him more open; but on the other hand, should they not suffice, the Insinuator is not on that account to abandon his purpose; let him try to accomplish by others what he has failed in himself--Let him examine his own conduct, and see if he has not neglected some one or more of the rules prescribed in the code; let him redouble his attention and his complaisance. Should it be necesssary to humble himself in order to command, let not the Insinuator forget the formal precept of his legislator, "Learn also to act the valet in order to become master." Auch zu weilen den knecht gemacht, um dereinst herr zu werden. [*33] After such a long series of condescensions and discussions the candidate at length must pronounce. If he submit to all these insinuations, he is admitted among the novices of the order; but should he persist in his refusal, let him learn the fate which awaits him from those who have experienced it. "Unhappy, supremely wretched is the youth whom the Illuminees have sought in vain to entice into their sect. Should he even escape their snares, do not let him flatter himself with being proof against their hatred; and let him take care. The vengeance of SECRET SOCIETIES is not a common vengeance; it is the hidden fire of wrath. It is irreconcilable, and scarcely ever does it cease the pursuit of its victims until it has seen them immolated." [*34] Such at least is the account which history gives us of those who have been guarded enough to withstand the insinuations of the Sect, and particularly of those who, after having gone the first steps with the Insinuator, have refused to proceed any farther with him. I could cite divers examples; though I once thought that I had met with one of a quite opposite nature, in the person of Camille de Jourdan, the same deputy who was to have been involved in the sentence of transportation against Barthelemy and Pichegru after the revolution of the 4th of September, but who escaped from the grasp of the triumvirate. I hear him speaking in the highest terms of one of these Insinuators, who had for a long time endeavoured to entice him into the order. He was much astonished at hearing me speak of these men as consummate in all the artifices of the most villanous [p. 425] hypocrisy. He maintained that his Illuminee was mild, modest, and moderate; full of respect for the Gospel, in a word, one of the most virtuous men he had ever known. In reply, I enumerated all the proceedings of the Insinuator, and the artifices he had played off before he quitted his prey. To all that Mr. Camille answered, "It is true; such was his behaviour; but it was his zeal for the sect which blinded him, and made him have recourse to such expedients in order to work what he called my conversion; yet, with all that, it was impossible for any body to speak of virtue and religion in so impressive a manner as he did without being at least an honest man."--"Well," said I, "I will venture to assert, that the last attempt of your Insinuator was as follows. He proposed to you to give your thoughts in writing on certain questions; you did so; your opinions proved directly opposite to his; he never saw you after, became your implacable enemy, and has never since ceased calumniating you." "All that again," answered Mr. Camille, "is very true; nor was it his fault that I did not lose both friends and fortune. Before that affair he used to praise me; afterwards, however, he represented me as a most dangerous man. You cannot conceive what lies he invented about me, and I was unfortunate enough to observe that they had made impression."--Is it possible to be believed? Mr. Camille could not yet be persuaded but that his Insinuator was a virtuous man; so profound are the arts of hypocrisy which are to be imbibed from Weishaupt's laws! I was acquainted with two bishops, who had as completely mistaken the characters of their Insinuators as Mr. Camille de Jourdan. But I will cite the example of Mr. Stark. I never could conceive what this Mr. Stark was whom I saw perpetually abused by the Illuminees. Nicolai and Mirabeau spared no pains to render him odious to the Protestants in Germany; they said he had received the Catholic orders of priesthood privately, [*35] though every thing seemed to denote that he was a Protestant. I took some pains to inform myself who this Mr. Stark was, and I found him one of the most learned Protestant ministers in Germany; that his zeal for his religion had acquired him the degree of Doctor, and had preferred him to be Grand Almoner and Counsellor to the Landgrave of Hesse Darmstadt; but that in common with several other learned men, such as Hoffman and Zimmerman, he had had the misfortune of being sought after by the Illuminees; that he would not hearken to them; that the Illuminees had expressed a wish to have an Adept near the person of the prince, and that he had been bold enough to answer his Insinuator, "If you seek support, I am too little and my prince too great to protect you."--And every candidate who will make the same resolute stand against the agents of the order must expect to be repaid with similar calumnies. The law of the order is invariable and precise, particularly with respect to those whose talents may be obnoxious to Illuminism. They must be gained over, or ruined in the public opinion. Such is the text, so soll man den schrift steller zu gewinnen suchen, oder verschreyen. [*36] But it is now time to follow the candidate who has shown himself more docile through the various preparatory degrees. [p. 426] Footnotes ^426:1 Original Writings. The Statutes reformed, Art. 18. ^426:2 Ibid. ^426:3 Original Writings.--The Statutes reformed, Art. 9, 13, and following.--Instructions for the Insinuators, Sect. XI, No. I.--for the Insinuated Nos. 1, 3, 5, &c.--Let. the 4th to Ajax. ^426:4 See Original Writings, Vol. II. Lett. 1, and 9. ^426:5 Original Writings, Vol. I. p. 40. Nos. 4, 6, and 8. ^426:6 The Last Works of Spartacus and Philo.--Instruction for the Stationary Prefects and Superiors, Page 153, Let. the 2d.--And Original Writings, Instructio pro Recipientibus, Nos. 1, and 5. ^426:7 Instructio pro Recipientibus, page 94, and Weishaupt's Letters, passim. ^426:8 Original Writings. See the first Letters to Ajax and Cato. ^426:9 See Degree of Regent, page 154, Letter N. ^426:10 See Instructions for the Provincial, No. 16. ^426:11 Original Writings, Vol. I. Sect. V. ^426:12 Original Writings, Vol. I. Let. of Minos, p. 169. ^426:13 See the New Works of Spartacus and Philo, and Instructions for the degree of Regent, No. 6. ^426:14 Orig. Writ. Instructiones pro Recipientibus, Page 54, No. 4; and Page 55, No. 18. ^426:15 Ibid. Vol. II. Part the 2d, Section and Degree of Regent. ^426:16 Orig. Writ. Vol. I. Let. to Ajax. ^426:17 See Instructions for the Insinuator, No. 4.--Weishaupt's Letters, passim-and the Degree of Regent. ^426:18 Ibid. Let. 3d to Ajax. ^426:19 Orig. Writ. Vol. I. Let. to Tiberius, P. 223. ^426:20 See Vol. I. page 33. ^426:21 Instructions for the Provincial and Orig. Writ. Vol. I. Part II, No. 3, page 26. ^426:22 Ibid. Nos. 11 and 13. ^426:23 Ibid. No. 15. ^426:24 Ibid. No. 18. ^426:25 Let. 11th to Marius and Cato. ^426:26 Instruction for the Local Superiors, Letter H. ^426:27 Instructiones pro Recipientibus. Orig. Writ. Vol. I. Nos. 1 and 7, page 54. ^426:28 Original Writings, Vol. II. Part II. Sect. I. ^426:29 Original Writings, Vol. II. Part II. Sect. I. ^426:30 Extract of the Instructions for the Brethren charged to enroll and receive the candidates--Original Writings, Vol. I. Sec. IX. and XII.--Also in the degree of Illuminatus Major; instructions on the same object, Document A. ^426:31 Original Writings, ibid. No 11 and 12. Illuminatus Major, Document A, and Letters K, L. ^426:32 Original Writings, ibid. No. 17 to 22. ^426:33 Ibid. Let 3d, to Ajax. ^426:34 Important Advice, &c. by Hoffmann. Preface to Vol. II. ^426:35 Mirabeau Monarchie Prussienne, Vol. V. art. Religion. ^426:36 Instructions for the Regent, No. 15. Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford [1798], at sacred-texts.com [p. 427] CHAP. IV. Second Part of the Code of the Illuminees--First preparatory Degree, of the Novice and of his Teacher. IN the early stages of Illuminism the duration of the time of trial for the Novice was three years for those who were not eighteen years of age; two years for those between eighteen and twenty-four; and one year for those who were near thirty. [*1] Circumstances have since occasionally caused the time to be abridged; but, whatever may be the dispositions of the Novice, though the time may be dispensed with, he must go through the different trials, or have got the start of them before he is admitted into the other degrees. During the interval he has no other superior but the Insinuator to whom he is indebted for his vocation, and during the whole time of the noviciate, the Insinuator is expressly forbidden to inform his pupil of any other member of the Order. This law was made to skreen the order from the dangers which might result from an indiscretion of the Novice, and to render the Insinuator alone responsible in such cases; for, should the Novice unfortunately be an indiscreet talker, the code expressly says, his imprudence would at most betray only one of the brethren. [*2] The first lessons of the Insinuator (in future his teacher) treat entirely on the importance and the inviolability of the secrecy which is to be observed in Illuminism. He will begin by telling his Novice, "Silence and secresy are the very soul of the Order, and you will carefully observe this silence as well with those whom you may have only reason to suppose are already initiated, as with those whom you may hereafter know really to belong to the Order. You will remember, that it is a constant principle among us, that ingenuousness is only a virtue with respect to our superiors, but that distrust and reserve are the fundamental principles. You will never reveal to any person, at present or hereafter, the slightest circumstance relative to your admission into the order, the degree you have received, nor the time when admitted; in a word, you will never speak of any object relating to the order even before Brethren, without the strongest necessity." [*3] Under the restrictions of this severe law, one Illuminee will often be a stranger to another; and the Novice will see in this no more than a measure of safety for the order, which might be ruined by the least indiscretion. [*4] More certainly to assure himself of the discretion of the Novice, the Insinuator will give him no further insight, nor entrust him with any writing [p. 428] relative to the order, until he has obtained the following declaration: "I, the undersigned, promise upon my honour, and without any reservation, never to reveal either by words, signs, or actions, or in any possible manner, to any person whatever, either relations, allies, or most intimate friends, any thing that shall be entrusted to me by my Introducer relative to my entrance into a secret society; and this whether my reception shall take place or not. I subject myself the more willingly to this secresy, as my Introducer assures me that nothing is ever transacted in this society hurtful to religion, morals, or the state. With respect to all writings which I may be entrusted with, any letters which I may receive concerning the same object, I engage myself to return them, after having made for my sole use the necessary extracts." [*5] These writings or books relative to the order are only lent to the Novice at first in small numbers, and for a short time; and then he must promise to keep them out of the reach of the prophane; but as he is promoted in rank, he may preserve them for a longer time, and is intrusted with a larger quantity; though not without having informed the Order of the precautions he shall have taken, lest in case of his death any of these writings should fall into prophane hands. [*6] He will afterwards learn, that the Brotherhood take many other precautions for secresy, not only respecting the statutes, but even with regard to the very existence of the Order. He will see, for example, in its laws, that should any of the brotherhood fall sick, the other brethren are assiduously to visit him, in the first place to fortify him, that is to say, to hinder him from making any declarations at the hour of his death; and secondly, to carry away whatever writings relative to the Order the sick man may have had in his possession, as soon as any symptoms of danger appear. [*7] He will at length learn, that to frustrate all attempts to trace even their very existence, the Order does not exist every where UNDER THE SAME NAME, but that they are to assume the name of some other Order, perhaps even of a literary society, or meet without any name which can attract the attention of the public. The first writing delivered to the Novice, to accustom him to profound secrecy, is what may be called the Dictionary of Illuminism. He must begin by learning the language of the Sect, that is to say, the art of communicating with the superiors and other adepts without the possibility of being understood by the prophane. By means of this language, the Illuminees are to be able to correspond with each other, without running the risk of its being discovered of what Brother they speak; from what place, in what language, at what period, and to whom, or by whom the letter is written. To avoid the discovery of persons, the Novice will learn, that no Brother bears the same name in the Order which he does in the world; indeed, had he been initiated in the higher degrees of Masonry, he would have seen the same precaution taken, where the Rosicrucians receive what they call their Characteristic or their adoptive name. The Novice will receive the characteristic immediately on his admission, and it will in some measure imply the parts which he is in future to act in the general conspiracy. It will be his task [p. 429] hereafter to study and write the history of his new patron he will by this method recognize in the qualities and actions of his hero the particular services which the order will expect from him. [*8] This name will be chosen as conformably as possible to the dispositions observed in him. Has he shown any propensity to repeat the impieties of Philosophism against the Gospel, he will be classed with the Celsi and Porphirii, or with the Tindals and Shaftsburys; should his turn be toward the hatred of Kings, or should his talents be judged useful for the polity of the Order, then his characteristic will be of the Brutus, Cato, or Machiavel tribe. He will not be told what he is to do to deserve his name, but they will contrive that it shall occur to him. Neither will he be told why Weishaupt assumed the name of Spartacus (a name so famous in Rome because he waged the war of the slaves against their masters); but should he ever be admitted to the higher mysteries, he will easily recognize the reason. [*9] The place from whence they write, as well as the persons of whom or to whom they write, is in like manner to be kept secret; a new Geography is therefore taught the Novice. He will thence learn, that Bavaria, the country of their founder, is denominated Achaia; Swabia, Pannonia; Franconia, Austria, and Tyrol are denoted by Illyria, Egypt, and Peloponnesus; Munich is called Athens; Bamberg, Antioch; Inspruck, Samos; Vienna in Austria, Rome; Wurtzburg, Carthage; Frankfort on the Mein becomes Thebes; and Heidelberg, Utica. Ingolstadt, the natal soil of the Order, was not sufficiently denoted by Ephesus; this privileged town was to be decorated with a more mysterious name, and the profound adepts bestowed on it that of Eleusis. Should the Novice ever be sent on a mission out of his own country, or to distant shores, he will then receive further instructions in the Geography of the Sect. [*10] He must also learn how to date his letters, and be conversant with the Illuminized Hegira or Calendar; for all letters which he will receive in future will be dated according to the Persian era, Jezdegert and beginning A.D. 630. The year begins with the Illuminees on the first of Pharavardin, which answer to the 21st of March. Their first month has no less than forty-one days; the following months, instead of being called May, June, July, August, September, and October, are Adarpahascht, Chardad, Thirmeh, Merdedmeh, Shaharimeh, Meharmeh: November and December are Abenmeh, Adameh: January and February, Dimeh, and Benmeh: The month of March only has twenty days, and is called Asphandar. [*11] The Novice must next learn how to decypher the letters he may receive; in order to which, he must make himself master of that cypher, which is to serve him until initiated into the higher degrees, when he will be entrusted with the hieroglyphics of the Order. [*12] He will also remember, that he is never to write the name of his Order; so venerable a word cannot be exposed to prophane eyes, and a circle with a point in the middle of it will supply this sacred word, and a long square or parallelogram will denote the word Lodge. [p. 430] After these preliminary studies, the young brother receives a part of the code, under the title of Statutes of the Illuminees. But these first statutes are nothing more than a snare, and the young Novice, with pleasure no doubt, sees them begin with the following words: "For the tranquillity and security of all the Brethren, whether Novices or active Members of the Society, and to prevent all ill-grounded suspicions, or disagreeable doubts, the venerable Order declares, that it absolutely has in view no project, enterprize, or undertaking hurtful to the state, to religion, or to good morals; and that it favours nothing of that nature in any of its members. Its designs, all its toils, solely tend to inspire men with a zeal for the perfection of their moral characters, to impregnate them with humane and sociable sentiments, to counteract the plans of the wicked, to succour oppressed and suffering virtue, to favour the advancement of men of merit, and to render those sciences universal which are as yet hidden from the generality of men. Such is not the coloured pretext, but the real object of the order." [*13] Even should the Novice not have entirely laid aside all suspicions respecting the intentions of the Order, still so positive a declaration he must think would guarantee him as to all obligations which might be imposed upon him. His grand aim is to be, to form his heart in such a maner as to gain not only the affection of his friends but even of his enemies. He is positively ordered to endeavour with all his might to acquire both interior and exterior perfection. It is true, he is soon after as positively ordered to study the arts of dissimulation and disguise; but then the Brother Insinuator is at his elbow to explain to him how that art coincides with true perfection, and thus suppress any suspicions which might arise from a comparison of these two injunctions. Beside, the Novice has many other duties to fulfil, which will deprive him of opportunity for such reflections. He is next told, that the Brethren must have but one mind, one will, and similar sentiments; that, to effectuate this, the Order has made choice of certain works, to which he must apply with the greatest attention. Should the Novice be one of those men whom an attachment to the Gospel rendered more circumspect as to the snares laid for his belief, the very choice of the books would suffice to show him, that the first object of the Insinuator was to persuade him, that it is not even necessary to be a Christian to acquire the perfection enjoined by the statutes. The Morality he is taught is that of Epictetus, Seneca, Antoninus, and Plutarch, all foreign to Christianity. He will also receive the works of modern Sophisters, such as Wieland, Meiners, and Bassadows, who by no means make perfection to consist in Christianity. Under the soothing and mellifluous language of a moderate and specious Philosophy, he will be led to lubricity and impiety, traced by the sophisticated pen of Helvetius in his celebrated work De L'Esprit. [*14] But the Insinuator must previously have sufficiently studied the dispositions of his pupil to know whether such propositions would any longer startle him. Beside, nothing is better calculated to dissipate all such fears, than the constant application that is required to those books which are put into the hands of the Novice, added [p. 431] to the care taken to deprive him of all such as might inspire him with contrary ideas. The Teacher is carefully to attend to all the rules laid down in the code on this subject, and to see that his Novices fulfil the intentions of the Order in this respect. He is frequently to converse with them; he is to mark out their occupations for them; he is even to make them unexpected visits to surprize them, and thus to see in what manner they apply to the code and other writings with which the Order has entrusted them. He is to require an account of what they have read, and extracts from the different works; he will assist them by his explanations; in short, nothing is to be neglected which can secure their progress in the spirit and morals of the Order. [*15] An object of far greater importance next attracts the attention of the Novice; it is that which the code calls the greatest of all; it is, the knowledge of men. The teacher will represent this to his pupil as the most interesting of all sciences. [*16] To make himself master of this science, the Novice receives the model of a journal in the form of tablets, and his teacher shows him how they are to be used. Provided with this journal, he is to make his observations on every body he finds himself in company with; he is to trace their characters, and account to himself every thing he has seen or heard. Lest his memory should fail him, he must always be provided with a loose paper or small tablets, on which he may at all hours note his observations, which he is afterwards carefully to digest in his journal. To be certain of the Novice's attention to this point, the Brother Teacher will examine his tablets and his journal from time to time. To render him more expert in the art of drawing the characters of the living, he will exercise the Novices on ancient authors, and on the heroes of antiquity. No study or custom is so frequently recommended as this in all the code of Illuminism. It is to be the grand study of the Novice, and the prime occupation of every degree. [*17] It is by his assiduity in this great art that the Novice will learn how to distinguish those whom he may hereafter judge proper to be admitted into or rejected from the Order; and it is with that view that the Preceptor perpetually presses him to propose those whom he may think fit for the Order. [*18] By this means a double object is attained; first, the propagation of the Order; and, secondly, a knowledge of its friends or enemies; the dangers it may be threatened with; and the means to be adopted, or the persons to be gained or courted, to avert the impending storm; in fine, of extending its conquests. Whether the Illuminee be a Novice, or in any other degree, he is bound by the laws of the Order to make his report in the prescribed forms at least once a month. [*19] While the Novice is perpetually making researches of this nature, he is not aware that he is as carefully watched by his Insinuator, who on his side notes and writes down every thing that he observes either as to the failings or the progress, the strong or weak side of his pupil, and these he as regularly transmits to the superiors. [*20] The pupil little suspects that the grand object of his is to bind him in such a maner to Illuminism, even long before he is acquainted with its secrets, that it shall be impossible for him to break those bonds which fear and tenor [p. 432] shall have imposed upon him, should he ever wish to shrink from the horrid plots and systems which he might thereafter discover. This profound policy of binding the Novices to Illuminism consists, first, in giving them a magnificent idea of the grandeur of the projects of the Sect, and, secondly, in a vow of blind obedience to the superiors in every thing which they judge conducive to the ends of the Order, which vow the Insinuator is to find means of extorting from his pupil. It is here particularly that Weishaupt appears to wish to assimilate the government of his Sect to that of the religious orders, and especially to that of the Jesuits, by a total sacrifice of their own will and judgment, which he exacts of the adepts; and to the exercising of the Novices in this point, he expressly adverts in his instructions to the Insinuators. [*21] But this is precisely the place to remark on the amazing difference between the illuminized and the religious obedience. Of that immense number of religious who follow the institutes of St. Basil, St. Benedict, St. Dominic, or St. Francis, there is not one who is not thoroughly convinced that there exists a voice far more imperious than that of his superior, the voice of his conscience, of the Gospel, and of his God. There is not one of them who, should his superior command any thing contrary to the duties of a Christian, or of an honest man, would not immediately see that such a command was a release from his vow of obedience. This is frequently repeated and clearly expressed in all religious institutes, and no where more explicitly or positively than in those of the Jesuits. They are ordered to obey their superior, but in cases only where such obedience is not sinful, ubi non cerneretur peccatum. [*22] It is only in cases where such obedience can have no sinful tendency whatever, ubi definiri non possit aliquod peccati genus intercedere. [*23] And, as if this were not sufficiently expressed, we hear their founder, at the very time when he recommends obedience to his religious, expressly saying, but remember that your vow is binding only when the commands of man are not contrary to those of God, ubi Deo contraria non praecipit homo. [*24] All those person therefore who, like Mirabeau, surmised certain coincidences, or as he calls them points of contact, between the religious institutes and the code of the Illuminees, should have begun by observing, that religious obedience is in its very essence an obligation of doing all the good which may be prescribed without the least taint of harm. It was easy for them on the contrary to demonstrate, that the obedience sought for by Weishaupt's code was a to obey every order received from the superior in spite of conscience, and unheedful of the most iniquitous guilt, provided it tended to the good of the Order. "Our society (for such are the expressions of the code) exacts from its members the sacrifice of their liberty, not only with respect to all things, but absolutely with respect to EVERY MEANS of attaining its end. Yet the presumption on the goodness of the means prescribed is always in favour of the orders given by the superiors. They are clearer-sighted on this object; they are better acquainted with it; and it is on this very account that they are nominated superiors It is their business to lead you through the labyrinth of [p. 433] errors and darkness; and in such a case obedience is not only a duty, but an object for grateful acknowledgment." [*25] Such is the obedience of the Illuminees; nor is there a single exception to be found in all their code. We shall see the Novice, before he terminates his trials, obliged to explain himself explicitly with respect to orders which he may receive from his superiors, and which he may think contrary to his conscience. In the first place his teacher is to intangle him, and make himself perfectly master of his most secret thoughts. Under the pretence of knowing himself better, while studying the art of knowing others, the Novice is to draw a faithful picture of himself, to unfold his interests and connections, as well as those of his family. Here again the Insinuator furnishes him with the tablets in the requisite form, that he may give this new proof of confidence to the Order; but this will neither be the last nor the most important one for which he will be called upon. On these tablets, the Novice is to write down his name, age, functions, country, and abode; the species of study in which he occupies himself, the books of which his library is composed, and the secret writings of which he may be in possession; his revenue, his friends, his enemies, and the reason of his enmities; in fine, his acquaintances and his protectors. To this table he is to subjoin a second, explaining the same objects with respect to his father, his mother, and all their other children. He is to be very explicit with respect to the education they received, to their passions and prejudices, to their strong and weak sides. We will exemplify this second table by an extract from the Original Writings, by which the reader will perceive that parents are not very much favoured--"The Novice, Francis Antony St . . . . . aged 22, represents his father as violent, and of soldierlike manners; his mother as a little avaricious; the weak side of both to be flattery and interest; both living after the old fashion, and with an antiquated frankness; in their devotion, headstrong, arrogant; with difficulty abandoning an ill-conceived project, and still more unforgiving to their enemies; that they nevertheless were little hated, because little feared; and hardly in the way of doing any body any harm." While the Novice is thus occupied in revealing all his secrets, and those of his family, the Insinuator on his side is drawing up a new statement of every thing he has been able to discover during the whole time of his pupil's trial, either with respect to him or to his relations. On comparing the two statements, should the superior approve of the admission of the Novice to the last proofs, he is then to answer the grand questions. It is by these questions that the Novice is to judge of the extent of the sacrifice he is about to make, and of the awful subjection of his whole will, conscience, and person, to Illuminism, if he wishes to gain admittance. The Questions are twenty-four in number, and couched in the following terms: [p. 434] I. Are you still desirous of being received into the Order of the Illuminees? II. Have you seriously reflected on the importance of the step you take, in binding yourself by engagements that are unknown to you? III. What hopes do you entertain, or, by what reasons are you induced to enter among us? IV. Would you still persevere in that wish, though you should find that we had no other object or advantage whatever in view but the perfection of mankind? V. What would be your conduct should the Order be of new invention? VI. Should you ever discover in the Order any thing wicked, or unjust to be done, what part would you take; Wenn unanstandige, ungerechte sachen vorkamen, wie er sich verhalten wurde? VII. Can you and will you look upon the welfare of the Order as your own? VIII. We cannot conceal from you, that Members, entering into our Order without any other motive than to acquire power, greatness, and consideration, are not those whom we prefer. In many cases one must know how to lose in order to gain. Are you aware of all this? IX. Can you love all the Members of the Order, even such of your enemies as may be members of it? X. Should it so happen that you should be obliged to do good to your enemies who are of the Order, to recommend them, for example, or extol them; would you be disposed to do so? XI. Do you, moreover, grant the POWER OF LIFE AND DEATH to our Order or Society? On what grounds would you refuse, or recognize in it such a right; Ob er dieser geselschaft, oder order auch das JUS VITae ET NECIS, aus was grnden, oder nich zugestehe? XII. Are you disposed on all occasions to give the preference to men of our Order, over all other men? XIII. How would you wish to revenge yourself of any injustice, either great or small, which you may have received from strangers or from any one of our Brethren? XIV. What would be your conduct should you ever repent of having joined our Order? XV. Are you willing to share with us happiness and misfortune? XVI. Do you renounce the idea of ever making your birth, employment, station, or power, serve to the prejudice or contempt of any one of the Brethren? XVII. Are you, or have you any idea of becoming a Member of any other society? XVIII. Is it from levity, or in hopes of soon being acquainted with our constitution, that you so easily make these promises? XIX. Are you fully determined to observe our laws? [p. 435] XX. Do you subject yourself to a BLIND OBEDIENCE WITHOUT ANY RESTRICTION WHATEVER? And do you know the strength of such an engagement? Ober unbedingten gehorsam angelobe, und wisse was das sey? XXI. Is there no consideration that can deter you from entering into our Order? XXII. Will you, in case it is required, assist in the propagation of the Order, support it by your counsels, by your money, and by all other means? XXIII. Had you any expectation that you would have to answer any of these questions; and if so, which question was it? XXIV. What security can you give us that you will keep these promises; and to what punishment will you subject yourself in case you should break any of them? [*26] In order to judge of the nature of the answers written and signed by the Novice, and confirmed by his oath, it will be sufficient to cast our eyes on the account of the reception of two Brethren, as it is contained in the archives of the Sect. To the VIth , should you ever discover in the Order any thing wicked, or unjust to be done, what part would you take? The first of these two Novices, aged 22, and named Francis Anthony St. . . . answers, swears, and signs, "I would certainly execute those things, if so commanded by the Order, because it may be very possible that I am not capable of judging of what is just or unjust. Besides, should they be unjust under one aspect, they would cease to be so as soon as they became a means of attaining happiness, the general end." The Novice Francis Xaverius B. . . . answers, swears, and signs, in like manner, "I would not refuse to execute those things (wicked and unjust) provided they contributed to the general good." To the XIth question, on life and death, the first Novice answers with the same formalities, "Yes, I acknowledge this right in the Order of Illuminees; and why should I refuse it to the Order, should it ever find itself necessitated to exercise it, as perhaps without such a right it might have to fear its awful ruin. The state would lose little by it, since the dead man would be replaced by so many others. Besides, I refer to my answer to question VI.;" that is to say, where he promised to execute whatever was just or unjust, provided it was with the approbation or by order of the Superiors. The second answers, swears, and signs to the same question, "The same reason which makes me recognize the right of life and death in the governors of nations, leads me to recognize most willingly the same power in my Order, which really contributes to the happiness of mankind as much as governors of nations ought to do." On the XXth question, on blind obedience without restriction, one answers, "Yes, without doubt, the promise is of the utmost importance; nevertheless I look upon it as the only possible means by which the Order can gain its ends." The second is less precise: "When I consider our Order as of modern invention and as little extended, I have a sort of repugnance in binding myself by so formidable a promise; because in that case I am justified in doubting whether a want of knowledge or even some domineering passion might not sometimes occasion [p. 436] things to be commanded totally opposite to the proposed object of the general welfare. But when I suppose the order to be more spread, I then believe, that in a society comprehending men of such different stations, from the higher to the lower, those men are best enabled to know the course of the world, and how to distinguish the means of accomplishing the laudable projects of the Order." This doubt of the Novice as to the antiquity of the Order must have displeased Weishaupt, who spared no pains to make it appear that Illuminism was of ancient date, the better to excite the curiosity and the veneration of the pupils; being content to enjoy the glory of his invention with his profound adepts, to whom only he revealed the secret of the invention of the highest degrees and the last mysteries. But our Novice went on to say, that on the whole he rather believed the Order to be of ancient than of modern invention; and, like his fellow Novice, he "promises to be faithful to all the laws of his Order, to support it with his counsels, his fortune, and all other means; and he finishes by subjecting himself to forfeit his honour, and even his LIFE, should he ever break his promise. [*27] When the Insinuator has found means of binding the Novice to the Order by such oaths, and especially when the young candidate shall have recognized without hesitation that strange and awful right which subjects the life of every citizen to the satellites of Illuminism, should any be unfortunate enough to displease its Superiors; when the Novice is blinded to such a degree as not to perceive that this pretended right, far from implying a society of sages, only denotes a band of ruffians and a federation of assassins like the emissaries of the Old Man of the Mountain; when, in short, he shall have submitted himself to this terrible power, the oath of the modern Seyde is sent to the archives of the Order. His dispositions then prove to be such as the superiors required to confer on him the second degree of the preparatory class; and the Insinuator concludes his mission by the introduction of his pupil. At the appointed time in the dead of the night, the Novice is led to a gloomy apartment, where two men are waiting for him, and, excepting his Insinuator, these are the first two of the Sect with whom the Novice is made acquainted. The Superior or his Delegate holds a lamp in his hand half covered with a shade; his attitude is severe and imperious; and a naked sword lies near him on the table. The other man, who serves as Secretary, is prepared to draw up the act of initiation. No mortal is introduced but the Novice and his Insinuator, nor can any one else be present. A question is first asked him, whether he still perseveres in the intention of entering the Order. On his answering in the affirmative, he is sent by himself into a room perfectly dark, there to meditate again on his resolution. Recalled from thence, he is questioned again and again on his firm determination blindly to obey all the laws of the Order. The Introducer answers for the dispositions of his pupil, and in return requests the protection of the Order for him. "Your request is just," replies the Superior to the Novice. "In the name of the most Serene Order from which I hold my powers, and in the name of [p. 437] all its Members, I promise you protection, justice, and help. Moreover, I protest to you once more, that you will find nothing among us hurtful to Religion, to Morals, or to the State;"--here the Initiator takes in his hand the naked sword which lay upon the table, and, pointing it at the heart of the Novice, continues, "but should you ever be a traitor or a perjurer, assure yourself that every Brother will be called upon to arm against you. Do not flatter yourself with the possibility of escaping, or of finding a place of security.--Wherever thou mayst be, the rage of the Brethren, shame and remorse shall follow thee, and prey upon thy very entrails."--He lays down the sword.--"But if you persist in the design of being admitted into our Order, take this oath:" The oath is conceived in the following teens: "In presence of all powerful God, and of you Plenipotentiaries of the most high and most excellent Order into which I ask admittance, I acknowledge my natural weakness, and all the insufficiency of my strength. I confess that, notwithstanding all the privileges of rank, honours, titles, or riches which I may possess in civil society, I am but a man like other men; that I may lose them all by other mortals, as they have been acquired through them; that I am in absolute want of their approbation and of their esteem; and that I must do my utmost to deserve them both. I never will employ either the power or consequence that I may possess to the prejudice of the general welfare. I will, on the contrary, resist with all my might the enemies of human nature, and of civil society." Let the reader observe these last words; let him remember them when reading of the mysteries of Illuminism; he will then be able to conceive how, by means of this oath, to maintain civil society, Weishaupt leads the adepts to the oath of eradicating even the last vestige of society. "I promise," continues the adept, "ardently to seize every opportunity of serving humanity, of improving my mind and my will, of employing all my useful accomplishments for the general good, in as much as the welfare and the statutes of the society shall require it of me. "I vow (ich gelobe) an eternal silence, an inviolable obedience and fidelity to all my superiors and to the statutes of the Order. WITH RESPECT TO WHAT MAY BE THE OBJECT OF THE ORDER I fully and absolutely renounce my own penetration and my own judgment. "I promise to look upon the interests of the Order as my own; and as long as I shall be a Member of it, I promise to serve it with my life, my honour, and my estates. Should I ever, through imprudence, passion, or wickedness, act contrary to the laws or to the welfare of the Serene Order, I then subject myself to whatever punishment it may please to inflict upon me. "I also promise to help the Order, to the best of my power, and according to my conscience, with my counsels and my actions, and without the least attention to my personal interest; also, to look upon all friends and enemies of the Order as my own, and to behave to them as the Order shall direct. I am equally disposed to labour with all my might and all my means at the propagation and advancement of the Order. [p. 438] "In these promises I renounce every secret reservation, and engage to fulfill them all, according to the true purport of the words, and according to the signification attached to them by the Order when it prescribed the Oath-- "So help me God." N. N. The oath being signed by the Novice, and enregistered in the minutes of the Order, the Initiator declares his admission, telling him at the same time that he is not to expect to know all the members, but those only who, being of the same degree, are under the same Superior.--From that moment advanced to the degree of Minerval, he is instructed in the signs of his new degree, which are much of the same nature as those of Masonry. He is then enjoined to give an exact list of all his books, particularly of those which might be precious or useful to the Order. He also receives the following questions which he is to answer in writing. I. What should you wish to be the object of our Order? II. What means, either primary or secondary, do you think most conducive to the attainment of that object? III. What other things would you wish to find among us? IV. What men do you either hope to meet, or not to meet, among us? [*28] The answers given to these questions will enable the Superiors to judge how far the young adept has imbibed the principles of the Order. But other helps are preparing for him, that he may be able to demonstrate by his answers both the progress he has made and that which he may be expected to make. Thus admitted to the degree of Minerval, he will find himself in future a Member of the Academy of the Sect. Let us then observe well both the Scholars and their Masters; for they still belong to the class of preparation. [p. 439] Footnotes ^438:1 The Statutes reformed, No. 7. ^438:2 The Statutes reformed, No. 16. ^438:3 Original Writings, Statutes, No. 20. Statutes reformed, No. 27. True Illuminism, General Statutes, No. 31, 32. ^438:4 Summary of the Statutes, No. 15. B. ^438:5 Original Writings, and the true Ilium. Art. Reverse. ^438:6 Institutes of the Insinuated, No 8. Orig. Writ. the real Illuminee No. 7. ^438:7 Statutes of the Minerval, No. 12. ^438:8 Original Writings, Vol. I. Instructions for the Insinuated, No. 7, and Vol. II. Let 13. ^438:9 Original Writings, Vol. I. Sec. 4. ^438:10 Original Writings, Sect. 2 and 3. ^438:11 See the real Illuminee first degree. ^438:12 The common cypher of the Illuminees consist in numbers corresponding to letters in the following order: 12. 11. 10. 9. 8. 7. 6. 5. 4. 3. 2. 1. a. b. c. d. e. f. g. h. i. k. l. m. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. 14. n. o. p. q. r. s. t. u. w. x. y. z. [p. 439] Click to enlarge Illuminati Cryptogram The hieroglyphics are contained in the opposite Plate, and are copied from those published at the end of the degree of Scotch Knight or Directing Illuminee. There is a third cypher, but that has never been published. ^439:13 The True Illuminee, General Statutes--Original Writings, Vol. 1. Sect. 8. ^439:14 See the list of these works in the Original Writings in the Statutes reformed, No. 25. ^439:15 See Instructiones pro Insinuantibus et Recipientibus. ^439:16 The true Illuminee. Instructions on the Art of forming Pupils, No. 12. ^439:17 See Ibid. No. 13,--Original Writings, the Statutes, reformed, No. 9, 10, 13, 14.--Instructiones pro Insinuantibus, No. 5, pro Recipientibus, No. 16, &c. &c. ^439:18 Instructiones pro Recipientibus, No 13. ^439:19 Instructions for the Insinuated, No. 5. C. and Original Writings, &c. ^439:20 Instructions for the Insinuator, No. 3 and 4.--The real Illuminee, Instructions on the Art of forming the Brethren, No. 1, 2. ^439:21 Mirabeau, Monarchie Prussienne, Vol. V. and Essay on the Illuminees, Chap. III.--Last Observations by Philo, page 61. ^439:22 Constitution of the Jesuits, Part. III. Chap. I. Parag. 2, Vol. I. Edition of Prague. ^439:23 Ibid. Part VI. Chap. I. ^439:24 Epist. Ignatii De Obedientia. ^439:25 Statutes reformed, No. 1, 4, and 25.--The true Illuminee, General Statutes, No. 11, 12. ^439:26 Original Writings. The account of the reception of two Novices, Vol. I. Sect. 17. ^439:27 See the two accounts. ^439:28 True Illuminee, 1st initiation, Page 51 and following. Original Writings, Vol. I. Sect. 15. Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford [1798], at sacred-texts.com [p. 440] CHAP. V. Third Part of the Code of the Illuminees--Second preparatory Degree--The Academy of Illuminism, or the Brethren of Minerva. WEISHAUPT, ruminating on what turn he should give to his Code of Illuminism, that its progress might be more subtile and infallible, expresses himself in the following terms, on the preparatory degrees which were to succeed to the novitiate of his pupils. "I am thinking of establishing, in the next degree, a sort of an academy of Literati. My design would include the study of the Ancients, and an application to the art of observing and drawing characters (even those of the living); and treatises and questions, proposed for public compositions, should form the occupations of our pupils.--I should wish, more especially, to make them spies over each other in particular, and over all in general. It is from this class that I would select those who have shown the greatest aptness for the Mysteries. My determination, in short, is, that in this degree they shall labour at the discovery and extirpation of prejudices. Every pupil (for example) shall declare, at least once a month, all those which he may have discovered in himself; which may have been his principal one, and how far he has been able to get the better of it." Ever influenced by a bitter hatred against the Jesuits, he does not blush to say--"I mean that this declaration shall be among us, what confession was among them." Her was, however, unfortunate in his application; for in the Order of the Jesuits, no superior could ever hear the confessions of the Inferiors; and thus their very institutes rendered impossible the horrid abuse, under which Weishaupt affected to cloak the abominable breach of confidence with respect to his pupils, when he says, "by these means I shall discern those who show dispositions for certain special Doctrines relative to Government or to Religion." [*1] The statutes of their Minerval degree are drawn up with a little more circumspection, and simply declare, "that the Order in that degree wishes to be considered only as a learned society or academy, consecrating its toils to form the hearts and minds of its young pupils both by example and precept." [*2] These are called the Brethren of Minerva, and are under the direction of the Major or Minor Illuminees. The academy properly so called is composed of ten, [p. 441] twelve, and sometimes fifteen Minervals, under the direction and tuition of a Major Illuminee. In the kalendar of the Sect, the days on which the academy meets are called holy, and its sittings are generally held twice a month; always at the new moon. The place where they meet is called, in their language, a Church. It must always be by an anti-chamber, with a strong door armed with bolts, which is to be shut during the time of the meeting; and the whole apartment is to be so disposed, that it shall be impossible for intruders either to see or hear any thing that is going forward. [*3] At the commencement of each sitting, the President is always to read, and, after his fashion, comment on some chosen passages of the BIBLE, or Seneca, of Epictetus, Marcus Aurelius, or Confucius. [*4] The care he takes to give to all these works the same weight and authority, will be sufficient to make the pupils view the Bible in a similar light with the works of the Pagan Philosophers. This lecture over, each pupil is questioned "as to the books which he has read since the last meeting; on the observations or discoveries he may have made; and on his labours or services toward the progress of the Order." Nor are the studies and the books of which the Brethren are to give an account, left to their own choice. To each of these academies there is appropriated a particular library, whenever circumstances will permit, calculated to insure the spirit of the Order; and this collection the Sect takes care to furnish. By three different means it is accomplished. First, by the money which the Brethren contribute; secondly, by the list of his own private Library, which is exacted from each candidate, who is obliged to furnish therefrom such books as may be required of him; the third means is derived from Weishaupt's grand principle, that EVERY THING WHICH IS USEFUL IS AN ACT OF VIRTUE. Now as it would be very useful for the Order to get possession of those rare books and precious manuscripts which Princes, Nobles, and Religious Orders keep shut up among their archives or in their libraries; all Illuminees acting as librarians or archive-keepers are admonished, exhorted, and seriously pressed not to make any scruple of secretly stealing such books or manuscripts, and putting them into the possession of the Sect. This is one of the most explicit lessons that Weishaupt gives to his adepts; at one time telling them not to make a case of conscience of giving to the Brethren what they may have belonging to the library of the Court; at another, sending a list of what should be stolen from that of the Carmes, he says, "all these would be of much greater use if they were in our hands.--What do those rascals do with all those books?" [*5] Yet, notwithstanding the caution with which the founder as yet withholds certain books from the hands of the Minerval, it is clear from the very assortment of the libraries of the Order, that he does not hesitate at giving the pupils a certain number directly tending to the grand object, and particularly those which may create a contempt for religion. He wishes much to see an impartial history of the Church; and he even proposes hereafter to [p. 442] publish one himself, or at least to contribute many articles toward such a work. He calls the attention of the young adepts to Sarpi, to Le Bret's arsenal of calumnies, and in short to all that has been written against Religious Orders. [*6] He had even put on the list those impious works which appeared under the name of Freret. He seemed to have forgotten for a moment his ordinary prudence; but, warned of it by Knigge, he corrected his error. [*7] Many other books, however, were to be comprehended in the Minerval library, which were to disguise the object of it; and it was one duty of the Presiding Illuminee to select such as would gradually direct his pupils to the grand object of the Sect; always remembering, that the most impious and seditious were reserved for the higher degrees. Should the President chance to find the System of Nature, Natural Polity, Helvetius on Man, or other such books, in the hands of his pupil, he was to avoid showing his pleasure or displeasure, and leave them. [*8] In short, it is in the Minerval schools that the teachers are in a particular manner to practise that great art of making the adepts rather as it were invent than learn the principles of the Order; because they will then, looking upon them as the offspring of their own genius, more strongly adhere to them. There is yet another scheme in these schools for attaching the young adepts to the Order.--Every brother is, at his first reception, to declare to what art or science he means principally to apply, unless his station, genius, or particular circumstances, debar him from the literary career; in which latter case, pecuniary contributions are to be an equivalent for those services which his talents cannot contribute. [*9] If the Brethren adopt literary pursuits, then the Order enters into engagements to furnish them with all possible assistance to forward their undertakings in the art or science on which they shall have determined; unless they should have chosen Theology or Jurisprudence, two sciences which the Order absolutely excepts from any such agreement. [*10] Their succours for the Minerval have a two-fold tendency. On the one side, they serve to prove that the adept does not neglect the science he has determined on, as he is to give an annual account of the discoveries he has made, and of the authors from which he has made selections. On the other hand, the brethren following the same branches of study are desired to help him with all the means in their power. Should he meet with difficulties which he cannot solve, he may apply to his Superior, who will either solve them himself, or send them to other members of the Order, who, better versed in those sciences, and bound to enlighten their Brethren, will send the required solutions. [*11] That his degree of Minveral may have all the appearances of a literary society, the Superiors annually propose some question for a public composition. The answers or dissertations are judged as in academies, and the discourse which obtains the prize is printed at the expence of the Order. The same advantages are held out to all adepts who wish to publish their works, provided they are not foreign to the views of the Founder. [*12]--They are sure to coincide with his intentions should they be of the nature of those which he calls pasquils, or such as would create mirth among the people at the expense [p. 443] of the priesthood, and of religious truths; such as parodies on the Lamentations of Jeremiah, or burlesque imitations of the Prophets; in a word, all such satires as dispose the people to the grand object of the Sect. The Minerval can give no better proofs than these of his progress. The Sect has booksellers who put these works into circulation, and the profits are transmitted to the coffers of the Order. It is, however, to be observed, that should a Minerval, or any other of the Brethren, make a discovery in any art or lucrative science, he is obliged, under pain of being looked upon as a false Brother, to impart the secret to the Order, who will look upon itself as proprietor of such secrets should they have been discovered by a Brother after his admission among them. [*13] Lest he should be unobserved when travelling, the Minerval is never to undertake any journey without previously informing his superiors, who will send him letters of recommendation for different Brethren on the road. He, in return, must carefully report every thing that he shall discover during his travels, which may be to the advantage or disadvantage of the Order. [*14] But we must not forget to mention, that during the academic sittings, the presiding Illuminee is at least once a month to take a review of the principal faults which he may have observed in any of his pupils. He is to interrogate them concerning those which they may have observed themselves; "and it would be unpardonable neglect," says the statutes, "should any pupil pretend that during the space of a whole month he had remarked nothing reprehensible. This would be a proof of the utmost negligence in the training of his mind to observation; and the Superior must not suffer it to pass without reprehension. He must also make his observations in such a manner as to excite their serious attention, and effectually to impress them with proper notions, so that each on returning home shall be ready to put in practice his advice for the advantage of the Order. [*15] Beside, the Superior is as much as possible to avoid letting a day pass without seeing his pupils, either he visiting them, or they him. [*16] But what can be the object of such vigilance, such unremitting attention to the Minerval Academy? A single word from the adept who, under the inspection of Weishaupt, organized its laws, will explain the enigma. It is, to adopt Knigge's expressions, by the works required of the young Academicians that the Order will be able to judge whether they are of that sort of stuff (that is to say of that turn of mind, susceptible of all the principles of Impiety and Anarchy) which is necessary for the higher degrees. After all these labours, should the Minerval adept still retain any of what they call religionist inclinations, he will then receive the three first Masonic degrees, and in them he may moulder during the rest of his life in the insignificant study of all their hieroglyphics. He will indeed still continue under the inspection of the Superiors of the Order; but he may rest assured, that he will always remain a Minerval, with a brevet of imbecility, on the registers of the Sect. [*17] On the contrary, should he have shown a sufficient want of attachment to religion or to his Prince; should he enthusiastically imbibe the principles of Illuminism, he will certainly be promoted to higher degrees. During his academical course the [p. 444] [paragraph continues] Sect has had unerring means of judging him; viz. by the questions he has solved (and which were put by the Order, not so much with a view of exercising his talents as of prying into his opinions), and by the statements delivered in by the Scrutators, of the impression made by the different principles which they had disseminated either in the shape of conversation, or by way of refutation, to try the young Minerval. The questions which he has had to investigate during his course sometimes regarded the secret of the Sect; at others, the security of the adepts, and of the Superiors. To envelop the chiefs in impenetrable darkness, and that their asylum may be proof against all attempts, death itself is to be divested of its horrors. The Minerval must not finish his Academical course till he has shown how far such fears have lost their influence over him; he shall declare whether he is ready to submit to every torture, rather than give the least information concerning the Order; or even evade the temptation by poison or suicide. A dissertation upon Cato, for example, will be given him as a task, and his management of it will show whether he is ready to fall by his own hand for the preservation of the Brethren. The patet exitus, or the exit is free, that is to say, that every man is free to leave this life at his pleasure, is one of those grand principles which must be advanced; it must be commented on and discussed by the young adept; and should any of those puerile ideas appear, which lead to believe in a God the avenger of suicide, he is not the man to be entrusted with the secret, and he shall be rejected. [*18] Many other questions are proposed in order to convince the Sect of the principles of the young Academician. It must sound his opinions on the means it employs, and on those in which he may hereafter be instrumental. He will be ordered to discuss Weishaupt's famous doctrine, that the end sanctifies the means; that is to say, that there are no means, not even theft, poison, homicide, or calumny, but are just and laudable when used for the attainment of objects which the Order may chuse to style just or holy. [*19] After all this, the Minerval shall furnish some dissertation from which his opinions on Kings and Priests may be ascertained; [*20] but the presiding adept must carefully avoid compromising himself; he must not openly applaud the epigrams, sarcasms, or even blasphemies of his pupils; that must be left to the brethren visitors, who will insinuate and encourage them without ever hinting that they are in perfect unison with the mysteries of the Order. He must not fail, however, to observe which of his pupils are the most zealous for such doctrines, and who complacently repeat these sarcasms or blasphemies; those, in short, who enthusiastically blend them in their Academical compositions. This accomplished, they have run their Academic career, and are next promoted to the degree of Minor Illuminee. [p. 445] Footnotes ^444:1 Orig. Writ. Vol. I.--Let. 4, to Cato. ^444:2 Statutes of the Minveral, No. 16. ^444:3 See the Minerval Ritual. ^444:4 Ibid. ^445:5 [p. 455] Orig. Writ. Vol. I. Let. 4. ^445:6 Ibid. ^445:7 Letter of Philo to Cato. ^445:8 Letter 3, to Cato. ^445:9 Orig. Writ. Vol. I.--Summary of the Institute, No. 9. ^445:10 Statutes of the Minerval, No. 1. ^445:11 Ibid. No. 2. ^445:12 Statutes of the Minerval Nos 6, and 10. ^445:13 Summary of the Institutes, No. 11.--The true Illuminee. ^445:14 Statutes of the Minerval, No. 11. ^445:15 Instructions for the Minerval, No. 4. ^445:16 Ibid. No. 3. ^445:17 Last word from Philo, Page. 90. ^445:18 See hereafter the Chapter on Juridical Depositions, in Vol. IV. ^445:19 Ibid. ^445:20 Ibid. Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford [1798], at sacred-texts.com [p. 446] CHAP. VI. Fourth Part of the Code of Illuminees.--Third preparatory Degree--The Minor Illuminee. THE object of the degree of Minor Illuminee is not only to dispose the Brethren more and more for the secrets which have not yet been revealed to them; but it has also in view their preparation for presiding over the Minerval Academies in which they have already shown their talents, and their zeal for the Sect. The means which are to produce this double effect are worthy of remark, on account of one of those artifices which Weishaupt alone could have invented. The Minor Illuminees hold sittings similar to those of the Minerval Academy. The President must necessarily be one of those adepts who, initiated in the higher mysteries of Illuminism, have attained the degree of Priest. He, alone having any knowledge of these higher mysteries, is particularly enjoined to keep his pupils in the persuasion that beyond the degree in which he is there is no farther secret to impart to them. But he is to spare no pains to infuse those opinions into their minds, of which the last mysteries are but the development. The Minor Illuminees are imperceptibly to become as it were the inventors and authors of Weishaupt's principles; that, believing them to be the offspring of their own genius, they may more zealously defend and propagate them. "It is necessary," says the code, "that the adept look upon himself as the founder of the new Order," that hence he may conceive a natural ardor for its success. To effectuate this object, an exordium is appropriated to the initiation in this degree. It is one of those discourses which, replete with voluntary obscurities, presents the most monstrous errors to the mind, but expressly mentions none. The veil which is thrown over them is neither coarse enough to hide, nor fine enough clearly to chew them; all that the new adepts can observe at a first hearing is, that the object of the Order is worthy of admiration and zeal; that an ardent enthusiasm should inflame the mind of the young adept for the attainment of the grand object of all the labours of Illuminism; that the enjoyment of this happiness depended much more on the actions than on the words of the adepts. What then is this object, and what are the obstacles that are to be overcome? Of what species are those actions, those labours of the adept, which are to forward its views? It is in these points that enigma and obscurity veils the intent, and it is here that genius is to invent. [p. 447] [paragraph continues] That the errors of the Sect might be considered as originating with the adepts, it goes on to say, the same discourse shall serve in future as a text for all those which the Brethren shall prepare for the meetings of the Order. The President will select the obscure passages, which may lead to the development of those opinions which he wishes to instil into his pupils; such will subjects chosen for their themes, and he will carefully exact practical conclusions. [*1] But to give the reader a better idea of what these themes or commentaries are to be, we shall quote a part of the original text. "There certainly exist in the world public crimes which every wife and honest man would wish to suppress. When we consider that every man in this delightful world might be happy, but that their happiness is prevented by the misfortunes of some, and by the crimes and errors of others; that the wicked have power over the good; that opposition or partial insurrection is useless; that hardships generally fall upon men of worth;--then naturally results the wish of seeing an association formed of men of vigorous and noble minds, capable of resisting the wicked, of succouring the good, and of procuring for themselves rest, content and safety--of producing all these effects, by means drawn from the greatest degree of force of which human nature is capable. Such views actuating a SECRET SOCIETY would not only be innocent, but most worthy of the wise and well-inclined man." [*2] What an ample field already opens itself to the commentating genius of the young adept! The Minor Illuminee will begin by investigating those general crimes to which the Sect wishes to put an end. And what are the crimes, who are the wicked persons that disturb the peace of mankind by means of power exercised over the good? What SECRET SOCIETIES are they which are destined to consummate the wishes of the sages, not by partial insurrections, but by the greatest degree of force of which human nature is capable? In a word, what is that new order of things, which are by such unheard of exertions to be substituted in place of existing institutions? The greater progress the adept shall make, and the nearer his commentaries shall coincide with the spirit of the Order, so much the more worthy shall he be judged to fulfil the second object of this degree. He is not yet to preside over a Minerval Academy, he is too inexperienced in the arts of a Superior; and the Order only entrusts him with two or three of those pupils; but, as a consolation for the smallness of his flock, he reads in his instructions, that should he have only formed one or two men for the Order during his whole life he will have done a noble act. Small as this mission is, still the adept is not left to his own prudence in the execution of it; he receives instructions by which he is to be guided. I forewarned my reader, that in this part of my Memoirs on Jacobinism, my object was, not solely to prove the Conspiracy of the Illuminees, but to render conspicuous the dangers which threatened society, while I was unveiling the means adopted by the Sect. Among these means, the laws laid down by Weishaupt for the Minor Illuminees are to be eminently distinguished; as the authority given, and the manner in which it is to be exercised (at first over two or three adepts only), naturally prepare them for more extensive [p. 448] commands. These laws and these instructions seem to be traced with the venom of the prudent serpent, unfortunately so much more active and ingenious in the arts of vice and seduction than good men are in the cause of virtue. This part of Weishaupt's Code is called--Instructions for forming useful labourers in Illuminism, and from it I shall make a large extract. Let the reader meditate on the tendency and probable consequences of such precepts, such laws, and artifices, all designed to form adepts for the most general, most astonishing, and most dreadful Conspiracy that ever existed. "Assiduously observe (say these instructions) every Brother entrusted to your care; watch him particularly on all occasions where he may be tempted not to be what he ought to be; that is precisely the moment when he must show himself; it is then that the progress he has made is to be discovered. Observe him again at those times when he least suspects it, when neither the desire of being praised, the fear of being blamed, nor the shame of, or reflexion on the punishment, can actuate his conduct. Be exact on such occasions in making your notes and observations. You will gain much both with respect to yourself and to your pupil. "Be careful lest your own inclinations should bias your judgment. Do not think a man excellent because he has a brilliant quality, nor judge him to be wicked because he has some striking defect: for that is the grand failing of those who are captivated at first sight. "Above all, guard against believing your man to be a genius because his discourse is brilliant. We are to judge by facts alone, whether a man is deeply interested. "Have little confidence in rich or powerful men; their conversion is very slow. "Your chief object must be to form the heart. He that is not deaf to the cries of the unfortunate; he that is constant though in adversity, and unshaken in his plans; he that feels his soul glow for great enterprizes; and he, particularly, who has formed his mind to observation, is the man of whom we are in quest. Reject those feeble and narrow minds who know not how to quit their usual sphere. "Read with your pupils those books which are easy to be understood, which abound in the picturesque, and are calculated to elevate the mind. Speak to them often; but let your discourses proceed from the heart, and not from the head. Your auditors easily kindle when they see you full of fire. Make them thirst after the moment when the grand object is to be accomplished. "Above all, stimulate them to the love of the object. Let them view it as grand, important, and congenial to their interests and favourite passions. Paint in strong colours the miseries of the world; tell them what men are, and what they might be; what line of conduct they should adopt; how little they know their own interests; how anxiously our society labours for them; and desire them to judge what they may expect from it, by what we have already done in the first degrees. "Shun familiarity on all occasions where your weak side may be seen; always speak of Illuminism in a dignified style." [p. 449] "Inspire esteem and respect for our Superiors; and dwell strongly on the necessity of obedience in a well-organized society." "Kindle the ardour of your pupil by laying great stress on the utility of our labours; avoid dry and metaphysical discussions. Let what you require of your pupils be within their means. Study the peculiar habits of each; for men may be turned to any thing by him who knows how to take advantage of their ruling passions. "To infuse into them a spirit of observation, begin by slight essays in conversation. Ask some easy questions on the means of discovering the character of a man notwithstanding all his dissimulation. Affect to think the answer a better one than you could have given yourself; that gives confidence, and you will find some other opportunity of delivering your own sentiments. Inform them of what observations you may have made concerning their voice, gait, or physiognomy. Tell them also, that they have the best dispositions, and that they only want practice. Praise some in order to stimulate others." "Having thus become acquainted with the immense difficulty attending on the art of bringing men to the point whither you wished to lead them, neglect no occasion of disseminating the good principles wherever you can, and of inspiring your pupils with courage and resolution: but never forget, that he who wishes to convert too many at once will convert nobody. In the towns where you reside, divide the task with the other Illuminees of the same degree as yourself. Chuse one or two, at most three, Minervals among those over whom you have the greatest influence or authority; but spare neither labour nor pains. You will have accomplished a great undertaking if, during your whole life, you form but two or three men. Let those whom you have selected be the constant object of all your observations. When one method does not succeed, seek out another; and so on, till you have found a proper one. Study to find out what your pupil is best fitted for; in what intermediary principles he may be deficient, and therefore inaccessible to the fundamental ones. The grand art consists in profiting of the right moment; at one time it is warm, at another cool reasoning which will persuade.--Let your pupil always think that it is to himself, and not to you, that he is indebted for the progress he makes. If he falls in a passion, never contradict; hearken to him though he be in the wrong. Never controvert the consequences, but always the principle. Wait for a favourable moment when you may explain your sentiments without appearing to contradict his. The best method is to agree with another person, whom you will pretend to attack on those subjects, while the Candidate whom you really wish to convince is only a stander-by and takes no part in the dispute: then support your arguments with all the vigour of which you are capable. "Whatever failings you wish to correct in him, speak of them as if they were not his; tell the story as if somebody else had been guilty of them; then take his advice on the subject; and by these means he becomes his own judge. "All this, it is true, requires time: hurry nothing; it is solidity and facility of action that we want in our adepts. Often to read, meditate, hearken to, see the same thing, and then to act, is what gives that facility which soon becomes natural. . . ." [p. 450] "Do you wish to draw forth his opinion? Propose a dissertation on certain questions relative to your object, as it were merely to exercise his genius. He thus learns how to meditate on the principles while you make a discovery of those which it is your object to eradicate from his mind." "Instruct, advise; but beware of cold declamations: drop a few words to the purpose when you shall perceive his mind to be in a proper state to receive them." "Never ask too much at once; let your conduct be provident, paternal, and solicitous.--Never despair; for one may do what one pleases with men. "Make yourself master of the motives of the principles your pupil has acquired from his education. If they be not consonant with our views, weaken then by insensible gradations, and substitute and strengthen others. But great prudence is necessary to operate this." "Observe what religions, sects, and politics, make men do.--One may enthusiastically wed them to follies; it is therefore in the manner of leading them that the whole art of giving the upper hand to virtue and truth consists. Only employ the same means for a good purpose which impostors employ for evil, and you will succeed. If the wicked are powerful, it is because the good are too timid and too indolent. There may be circumstances also, under which it will become necesssary to show displeasure, and even anger, in defence of the rights of man." "Tell your pupils, that they are only to attend to the purity of the views which actuate the Order; and that antiquity, power, or riches, should be perfectly indifferent to them." "Tell them, that should they find elsewhere a society which would lead them with greater speed or with more certainty to the desired end, the Order would eternally regret the not having been acquainted with it before--That in the mean time we obey the laws of our Superiors, labouring in peace, and persecuting no man.--Follow these rules of conduct, and once more remember, that you will have rendered an essential service to the world, though you should form but two men according to our principles. "Carefully profit of those moments when your pupil is discontented with the world, and when every thing goes contrary to his wishes; those moments when the most powerful man feels the want of the support of others, to attain a better order of things. It is then that you must press the swelling heart, stimulate the sensibility, and demonstrate how necessary secret societies are, for the attainment of a better order of things." "But be not too easy in your belief with respect to the reality or constancy of such feelings. Indignation may be the effect of fear, or of the fleeting hopes of some passion which one wishes to gratify. Such feelings are not naturalized; men are not perfect in so short a time; prepare for the worst, and then insist. A heart which easily melts easily changes." "Never promise too much, that you may be able to perform more than you promise. Rekindle exhausted courage; repress excessive ardour; inspire hope in misfortune, and fear in success." [p. 451] "Such are the rules which will form you for a good preceptor and a leader of men. By an exact attention to them you will add to the number of the elect. If your own happiness be dear to you, labour (under our direction) at delivering many thousands of men, who wish to be good, from the dire necessity of being wicked.--Believe us, for it is the precept of experience, bereave vice of its power, and every thing will go well in this world: for if vice be powerful, it is only because one part of the good is too indolent, while the other is too ardent; or else, that men suffer themselves to be divided, or leave the care of Revolutions to futurity; the fact is, that in the mean time they had rather bend under the yoke, than efficaciously resist vice. If they once became sensible that virtue does not entirely consist in patience, but in action also, they would start from their sleep.--For your part, unite with the Brethren; place your confidence in our Society; nothing is impossible to it, if we follow its laws. We labour to secure to merit its just rewards; to the weak support, to the wicked the fetters they deserve; and to man his dignity. Such is the new Canaan, the new land of Promise, the land of abundance and blessing; though as yet, alas! we discover it but from a distance." [*3] I was frequently tempted to interrupt the course of this extract by my reflexions; but what reader is there that will not ask himself, What zeal, what strange ardour is this, that can have led Weishaupt to combine and dictate means so powerful to captivate the minds of his pupils? Is there a parent, is there a preceptor, whose love for his child or his pupil ever suggested more efficacious rules? These, however, are only a few of the lessons which the Minor Illuminee is always to have present to his mind to direct him in the training of the young adepts. He is not alone entrusted with the task. All the Brethren of the same degree partake in the care of watching over the lower ones, and each notes on his tablets even the most insignificant circumstances. Their several observations are compared, and of the whole a general statement is formed, according to which each pupil will be judged by his superiors. [*4] Meanwhile, it is natural to ask, what can these principles be for which the youth is so carefully trained? What can be the sublime virtue that is to be the result of so much care? We shall soon discover them, the principles of shameless villainy. This sublime virtue is the combination of every art that can plunge mankind into corruption, and immerse him in all the horrors of universal anarchy. Yes, we shall see the man who says to his disciples, employ the same means for a good purpose which impostors employ for evil, proved to be the arch-impostor, training his disciples to every crime, and preparing the most terrible disasters for society with more ardour and more artifice than ever the upright man has been seen to employ zeal and wisdom in the cause of virtue and the support of the laws. The better to dispose the young adepts, the Minor Illuminee is assisted in his functions and overlooked by the Major Illuminee, that is to say, by the adepts of the highest degree among those of the preparatory class. [p. 452] Footnotes ^452:1 The true Illuminee, Instructions for the Superiors of this degree. ^452:2 Discourse on this Degree. ^452:3 Extract from the Instruction C. and D. for the Minor Illuminees. ^452:4 Instruction C. Sect. II. A. 2. Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford [1798], at sacred-texts.com [p. 453] CHAP. VII. Fifth Part of the Code of Illuminees--Fourth preparatory Degree--The Major Illuminee, or the Scotch Novice. THE degree which follows that of Minor Illuminee is sometimes called Major Illuminee; at other times, Scotch Novice. Under this two-fold denomination a double object is comprized. As Scotch Novice, the adept is turned in upon Masonry; and it is only a snare for imposing upon the credulity of those, who have not given the requisite symptoms for being initiated in the higher mysteries of the Sect. It is an introduction to the degree of Scotch Knight, which terminates the career of the dupes. But as a degree of Illuminism, it will encompass the adept with new bonds, more extraordinary and more firm than the former; it is a more immediate preparation for the grand mysteries; in short, it is from this degree that the masters of the Minerval Academies are selected. Let us begin by laying open the artifice of that strange bond which the adept will never dare to rend asunder, though he should wish to withdraw from Illuminism, or more particularly should he be tempted to reveal what he may have already discovered of the artifices, principles, or grand object of the Sect. Before the candidate is admitted to the new degree, he is informed that his reception is resolved on, provided he gives satisfactory answers to the following questions: I. Are you acquainted with any society grounded on a better constitution, or more holy and solid than ours, and which tends with more certainty or expedition to the object of your wishes? II. Was it to satisfy your curiosity that you entered our society? or, was it to concur with the chosen among men to universal happiness? III. Are you satisfied with what you have seen of our laws? Will you labour according to our plan, or have you any objection to propose against it? IV. As there will be no medium for you, declare at once, whether you wish to leave us, or whether you will remain attached to us for ever? V. Are you a member of any other society? [p. 454] VI. Does that society impose any thing detrimental to our interests; for example, the discovery of our secrets; or, does it require you to labour for itself exclusively? VII. Should such things be ever required of you, tell us upon your honour, whether you would be disposed to acquiesce in them? These questions answered, there still remains another proof of confidence which the Order expects from the candidate. This is nothing less than an exact and candid account of his whole life, written without any reservation or dissimulation whatever. The necesssary time is given him; and this is the famous bond, or rather snare, into which when Weishaupt has once brought the candidate he exultingly exclaims, "Now I hold him; I defy him to hurt us; if he should wish to betray us, we have also his secrets." It would be in vain for the adept to attempt to dissimulate. He will soon find that the most secret circumstances of his life, those which he would most anxiously wish to hide, are all known by the adepts. The arts which he has hitherto practised to pry into the most secret motions of the hearts of his pupils, into their tempers and passions, their connections, their means, their interests, their actions and opinions, their intrigues and faults, have all been more artfully employed by others in watching himself. Those who compose the lodge into which he is going to be received, are the very persons that have been scrutinizing his past life. All the discoveries made by his Insinuator, all the statements he has been obliged to give of himself as required by the Code, every thing which the Brother Scrutators, either known or unknown, have been able to discover concerning him during his degrees of Minerval or of Minor Illuminee, have been accurately transmitted to the Brethren of the new lodge. Long before his admission, they had accomplished themselves in the scrutinizing arts.--These wretches then will mimick even the canonization of the saints! The very precautions which Rome takes to discover the least taint in those whom it proposes to the veneration of the faithful, this illuminizing Sect will adopt, in order to satisfy itself that in its adepts no civil nor religious virtue can be traced. Yes, the villains in their dens wished to know each other, and smiled to see their accomplices as wicked as themselves. I cannot conceive whence Weishaupt could have taken this part of his Code; but let the reader form an idea of a series of at least fifteen hundred questions on the life, the education, the body, the mind, the heart, the health, the passions, the inclinations, the acquaintances, the connections, the opinions, the abode, the habits, and even the favourite colours of the candidate; on his relations, his friends, his enemies, his conduct, his discourse, his gait, his gesture, his language, his prejudices, and his weaknesses. In a word, questions which relate to every thing that can denote the life or character, the political, moral, or religious sentiments, the interior or exterior of the man; every thing he has said, done, or thought, and even what he would say, do, or think under any given circumstances. Let the reader form an idea of twenty, thirty, and sometimes a hundred questions on each of these heads. Such will be the Catechism to which the Major Illuminee must be able to answer; such are the [p. 455] rules he is to follow in tracing the lives or characters of the young Brethren, or even of those prophane of whom the Sect wishes to have particular information. Such is the scrutinizing Code which has directed the researches made as to the life of the candidate antecedent to his admission to the degree of Major Illuminee. These statutes are called by the Order the Nosce te ipsum (know thyself). When one brother pronounces these words, the other answers Nosce alios (know others); and this answer denotes much better the object of the Code, which might very properly be styled the perfect spy. Let it be judged by the following questions: "On the Physiognomy of the Candidate:--Is he of a florid complexion, or pale? Is he white, black, fair, or brown? Is his eye quick, piercing, dull, languishing, amorous, haughty, ardent, or dejected? In speaking, does he look full in the face and boldly, or does he look sideways? Can he endure being stared full in the face? Is his look crafty, or is it open and free; is it gloomy and pensive, or is it absent, light, insignificant, friendly, or serious? Is his eye hollow, or level with the head, or does it stare? His forehead, is it wrinkled, and how; perpendicularly, or horizontally? &c. "His Countenance:--Is it noble or common, open, easy, or constrained? How does he carry his head; erect or inclined, before, behind, or on one side, firm or shaking, sunk between his shoulders, or turning from one side to the other? &c. "His Gait:--Is it slow, quick, or firm? Are his steps long, short, dragging, lazy, or skipping? &c. "His Language:--Is it regular, disorderly, or interrupted? In speaking, does he agitate his hands, his head, or his body, with vivacity? Does he close upon the person he is speaking to? Does he hold them by the arm, clothes, or button-hole? Is he a great talker, or is he taciturn? If so, why? Is it through prudence, ignorance, respect, or sloth? &c. "His Education:--To whom does he owe it? Has he always been under the eyes of his parents? How has he been brought up, and by whom? Has he any esteem for his masters? To whom does he think himself indebted for his education? Has he travelled, and in what countries?" Let the reader, by these questions, judge of those which treat of the mind, the heart, or the passions of the Candidate. I will just note the following: "When he finds himself with different parties, which does he adopt, the strongest or the weakest, the wittiest or the most stupid? Or does he form a third? Is he constant and firm in spite of all obstacles? How is he to be gained, by praise, flattery, or low courtship; or by women, money, or the entreaties of his friends?" &c.--"Whether he loves satire, and on what he exercises that talent; on religion, superstition, hypocrisy, intolerance, government, ministers, monks?" &c. This however is not all that the scrutators are to note in their statements. They are to elucidate each answer by a fact, and by such facts as characterize the man at a moment when he least suspects it. [*1] They are to follow their prey to his [p. 456] bolster, where they will learn whether he is a hard sleeper, whether he dreams, and whether he talks when dreaming; whether he is easily or with difficulty awakened; and should he be suddenly, forcibly, or unexpectedly awakened from his sleep, what impression would it make on him? Should any of these questions, or any part of the Candidate's life, not have been sufficiently investigated by the Lodge, divers of the brethren are ordered to direct all their enquiries toward that point. When at length the result of all their researches is found to coincide with the wishes of the Sect, the day for his reception is appointed. Neglecting all the insignificant particularities of the Masonic rites, we shall attend entirely to those circumstances which peculiarly belong to Illuminism. The adept, introduced into a gloomy apartment, reiterates his oath to keep secret whatever he may see or learn from the Order. He then deposits the history of his life (sealed up) in the hands of his introducer. It is read to the Lodge, and compared with the historical table which the Brethren had already formed respecting the Candidate. This done, the Introducer says to him, "You have given us a welcome and valuable proof of your confidence; but indeed we are not unworthy of it; and we hope that it will even increase in proportion as you become better acquainted with us. Among men whose sole object is to render themselves and others better, no dissimulation should subsist. Far be any reserve from us. We study the human heart--and do not hesitate or blush at revealing to each other our faults or errors.--Here then is the picture which the Lodge had drawn of your person. You must own that some features are not unlike. Read, and then answer, whether you still wish to belong to a society which (such as you are represented here) opens its arms to receive you." Could indignation operate more powerfully on the mind of the Candidate at the sight of his having been so treacherously watched, than the fear of abjuring a society which henceforth possesses such arms against him, he would not hesitate at asking for his dismission; but he sees the consequences of such a step, and feels that it might cost him very dear. Beside, he is so familiarized with the scrutinizing system, that he can scarcely be offended with it, though operating on himself. He is left for a certain time to his meditations. The desire of acquiring a new degree works upon him and at length turns the scales; he is introduced to the Lodge of the Brethren; and there the veil which hides the secrets of the Sect is partly raised; or, rather, he is himself still more unveiled, that the Sect may discern whether all his views and wishes coincide with theirs. After a suitable preamble, the Initiator tells him, "that he has still some few questions to answer, relative to objects on which it is absolutely necessary that the opinions of candidates should be known." The reader is desired to pay particular attention to these questions; as it will enable him, when he shall come to read of the mysteries, more clearly to observe the succession and gradation with which such principles are infused [p. 457] into the mind of the adept, as if he had invented and conceived them all himself. "I. Do you find that, in the world we live in, virtue is rewarded and vice punished? Do you not on the contrary observe, that the wicked man is exteriorly more comfortable, more considered, and more powerful, than the honest man? In a word, are you content with the world in its present situation?" "II. In order to change the present order of things, would you not, if you had it in your power, assemble the good and closely unite them, in order to render them more powerful than the wicked?" "III. If you had your choice, in what country would you wish to have been born rather than your own?" "IV. In what age would you wish to have lived?" "V. Always premising the liberty of choice, what science and what state of life would you prefer?" "VI. With respect to history, who is your favourite author or your master?" "VII. Do you not think yourself in duty bound to procure all the exterior advantages possible for your tried friends, in order to recompense them for their probity, and to render life more agreeable to them? Are you ready to do what the Order exacts of each member in this degree, when it ordains that each one shall bind himself to give advice every month to the Superiors, of the employments, support, benefices, or other such like dignities, of which he can dispose, or procure the possession by means of his recommendations; that the Superiors may present worthy subjects of our Order to all such employments?" The answers of the candidate are to be returned in writing, and inserted in the registers of the Lodge. It will naturally be expected, that the greatest dissatisfaction with the present order of things is to be expressed, as well as an ardent wish for a revolution which shall change the whole face of the Universe. He will also promise to support, by all the means in his power, the election of none but worthy brethren to offices of emolument and trust, or such as may augment the power or credit of Illuminism, whether about the court or among the people. On his declaring such to be his sentiments, the Initiator addresses him in the following discourse: "Brother, you are a witness, that it is after having tried the best of men, that we seek little by little to reward them, and to give them support, that we may insensibly succeed in new modelling the world. Since you are convinced how imperfectly men have fulfilled their real destiny; how every thing has degenerated in their civil institutions; how little the teachers of wisdom and of truth have enhanced the value of virtue, or given a happier disposition to the world; you must be persuaded, that the error lies in the means which the sages have hitherto employed. Those means, therefore, must be changed, in order to reinstate in its rights the empire of truth and wisdom. And this is the grand object of the labours of our Order. Oh, my friend! my brother! my son! when here convened, far from the prophane, we consider to what an extent the [p. 458] world is abandoned to the yoke of the wicked, how persecution and misfortune is the lot of the honest man, and how the better part of human nature is sacrificed to personal interest. Can we at such a sight be silent, or content ourself with sighing? Shall we not attempt to shake off yoke?--Yes, my brother, rely upon us. Seek faithful co-operators, but seek them not in tumults and storms; they are hidden in darkness. Protected by the shades of night, solitary and silent, or reunited in small numbers, they, docile children, pursue the grand work under the direction of their Superiors. They call aloud to the children of the world, who pass by in the intoxication of pleasure--how few hearken to them! He alone who has the eye of the bird of Minerva, who has placed his labours under the protection of the star of night, is sure of finding them." But, lest this discourse should not have given the Candidate a sufficient insight as to the object of the new degree, the Secretary opens the Code of the Lodge, entitled A general view of the system of the Order. Here the young Illuminee learns, that the object of the Order is to diffuse the pure truth, and to make virtue triumph. Nothing, however, is explicitly said on what is to be understood by the pure truth. He is only told, that in order to diffuse it, "he must begin by liberating men from their prejudices, and by enlightening their understandings; then reunite all the common forces for the refinement of all sciences from the dross of useless subtleties, and for the establishment of principles drawn from Nature.--To attain this," continues the Secretary, "we must trace the origin of all sciences; we must reward oppressed talents; we must raise from the dust the men of genius; we must undertake the education of youth; and, forming an indissoluble league among the most powerful geniuses, we must boldly, though with prudence, combat superstition, incredulity, and folly; and at length form our people to true, just, and uniform principles on all subjects. "Such is the object of our Minerval Schools, and of the inferior degrees of Masonry, over which our Order wishes to acquire all the influence possible, in order to direct it towards our object. We also have our superior degrees, where the Brethren, after having passed through all the preparatory degrees, become acquainted with the ultimate result of the labours and of all the proceedings of the Order." To obtain the completion of that result, "it will be necesssary to divest vice of its power, that the honest man may find his recompense even in this world; but in this grand project, we are counteracted by the Princes and the Priesthood; the political constitutions of nations oppose our proceedings. In such a state of things then what remains to be done? To instigate revolutions, overthrow every thing, oppose force to force, and exchange tyranny for tyranny? Far be from us such means. Every violent reform is to be blamed, because it will not ameliorate things as long as men remain as they are, a prey to their passions; and because wisdom needeth not the arm of violence." "The whole plan of the Order tends to form men, not by declamation, but by the protection and rewards which are due to virtue. We must insensibly [p. 459] bind the hands of the protectors of disorder, and govern them without appearing to domineer." "In a word, we must establish an universal empire over the whole world, without destroying the civil ties. Under this new empire, all other governments must be able to pursue their usual process, and to exercise every power, excepting that of hindering the Order from attaining its ends and rendering virtue triumphant over vice." "This victory of virtue over vice was formerly the object of Christ, when he established his pure religion. He taught men, that the path to wisdom consisted in letting be led for their greater good by the best and wisest men. At that time preaching might suffice; the novelty made truth prevail; but at present, more powerful means are necesssary. Man, a slave to his senses, must see sensible attractions in virtue. The source of passions is pure; it is necessary that every one should be able to gratify his within the bounds of virtue, and that our Order should furnish him with the means." "It consequently follows, that all our brethren, educated on the same principles, and strictly united to each other, should have but one object in view. We must encompass the Power of the earth with a legion of indefatigable men, all directing their labours, according to the plan of the Order, towards the happiness of human nature--but all that is to be done in silence; our brethren are mutually to support each other, to succour the good labouring under oppression, and to seek to acquire those places which give power, for the good of the cause." "Had we a certain number of such men in every country, each might form two others. Let them only be united, and nothing will be impossible to our Order; it is thus that in silence it has already performed much for the good of humanity." "You behold, Brother, an immense field opening to your activity; become our faithful and worthy co-operator, by seconding us with all your might; and remember, that no service will pass without its just reward." After this lesson, two chapters directly treating on the functions of the Major Illuminee are read to him. With the first he is already acquainted: it is the Code of the Insinuator or Brother Recruiter. He is also now entrusted with it, as it is part of his duty in future to judge of the pupils of all the Insinuators. The second treats of the duties of the Scrutator; this is also delivered into his care, because he must particularly exercise that art while presiding over the Minerval academies: and he must necessarily learn how his new brethren found means of tracing so exact an historical portrait of himself, and of penetrating even more successfully than he could into the interior recesses of his heart; he must also learn to distinguish such pupils as, with dispositions similar to his own, are worthy of being admitted to his new degree. He now has but one more degree to go through, before he is admitted into the class of the mysteries, and this is termed by the Sect the Scotch Knight. [*2] Footnotes ^459:1 See Weishaupt's Letters. ^459:2 The whole of this chapter is nothing more than an extract from the degree of Major Illuminee, and from the instructions contained in the ritual of that code in The True Illuminee. Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford [1798], at sacred-texts.com [p. 460] CHAP. VIII. Sixth Part of the Code of the Illuminees. Intermediary Class--The Scotch Knight of Illuminism; or Directing Illuminee. UNDER the appellation of Intermediary Class of Illuminism might be comprehended all the Degrees which Weishaupt had borrowed from Freemasonry. In that case we should comprize under this denomination the three degrees of Apprentice, Fellow-Craft, and Master. But it has been already said, that these degrees are simply a passport for the Sect into the Masonic Lodges; and that its object may be less conspicuous, it leaves them in their original Masonic state. This, however, is not the case with the higher degrees of Scotch Masonry. The Sect shrewdly surmised that the views of these degrees coincided with their own: beside, it wanted some of these superior degrees, either for the direction of those Masonic Lodges which it composed of its own members, or who were to gain admittance, dominate, and preside over other Lodges which were not devoted to Illuminism. The great veneration in which the Scotch Knights are generally held by Masons, more strongly determined the Baron Knigge to make himself master of this degree, and engraft it on Illuminism. The Sect has constituted this into both an intermediary and a stationary degree. It is stationary for those into whom it despairs of ever infusing the principles required for a admission to the mysteries; but it is only intermediary for those who have shown dispositions more accordant with the pursuits of the Sect. [*1] Whatever may be his destiny, no Brother is ever admitted into this new degree, until he has previously given proofs of the progress he has made in the arts of Scrutator, whose code must have been his chief study since his admission to the degree of Major Illuminee. The secret Chapter of the Knights has had the precaution to propose certain questions to him to ascertain how far he is capable of judging of the state of the mind by exterior appearances. He will have had to answer, for example, to the following ones:--"What is the character of a man whose eyes are perpetually in motion, and whose countenance is changeable? What features denote voluptuousness, melancholy, and pusillanimity?" [*2] As a further proof of the progress he has made, he is to transmit to his superiors another dissertation on the life of the hero whose name he bears for [p. 461] his characteristic. The history of his own life, which he had delivered in the antecedent degree, had laid open the whole of his existence, and all his actions through life. This new dissertation will show the Order what he admires or disapproves of in others, and will particularly demonstrate whether he has discovered those qualities in his patron which the Order wished he should imbibe and imitate when it gave him his characteristic. [*3] Should any part of his life have escaped the vigilance of the Scrutators, he is still at liberty to give a new proof of his confidence in the Order; and this is described as a meritorious act; but he may reserve it for the cognizance of the Superior of the Order only. [*4] He is then to declare under his hand-writing, that he looks upon the Superiors of Illuminism as the secret and unknown though legitimate Superiors of Freemasonry; that he adheres and always will adhere to the illuminized system of Masonry, as the best and most useful existing; that he utterly renounces every other association; that he is, in short, so persuaded of the excellence of Illuminism, that he fully adopts its principles, and firmly believes himself bound to labour, under the direction of his superiors, at the object and according to the intentions of the Order for the happiness of mankind. [*5] After having received these numerous pledges, the Scotch Knights invite the new Brother to a secret Chapter, for such is the name given to the Lodges of this degree. It is hung with green, richly decorated and brilliantly lighted. The Prefect of the Knights, booted and spurred, is seated on a throne erected under a canopy all of the same colour. On his apron a green cross is seen, and on his breast the star of the Order; he wears the riband of St. Andrew in salter from right to left, and holds a mallet in his hand. On his right stands the brother sword-bearer, holding the sword of the Order; on his left the master of the ceremonies with a stick in one hand, and the ritual in the other. The Knights assembled are all booted and spurred, each girt with a sword, and all wear the cross suspended at their necks by a green riband. The Officers of the Order are to be distinguished by a plumage, and a priest of the Order compleats the Lodge. The Prefect then delivers himself as follows to the Candidate: "You here behold a part of those unknown legions which are united by indissoluble bonds to combat for the cause of humanity. Are you willing to make yourself worthy of watching with them for the sanctuary? Your heart must be pure, and a heavenly ardour for the dignity of nature must fire your breast. The step you are taking is the most important one of your life. Our games are not vainly ceremonial. In creating you a knight we expect of you that you will perform exploits grand, noble, and worthy of the title you receive. Long life to you, if you come to us to be faithful; if honest and good you answer our expectations. Should you prove a false Brother, be both cursed and unhappy, and may the grand Architect of the Universe hurl you into the bottomless pit! Now bend thy knee, and on this sword take the oath of the Order." At these words the Prefect seats himself, the Knights are standing with their swords drawn, and the Candidate pronounces the following oath:-- [p. 462] "I promise obedience to the excellent Superiors of the Order. In as much as it shall depend upon me, I engage--never to favour the admission of any unworthy member into these holy degrees--to labour at rendering the Ancient Masonry triumphant over the false systems which have crept into it--to succour, like a true Knight, innocence, poverty, or oppressed honesty--Never to be the flatterer of the great, nor the slave of Princes;--to combat courageously, though prudently, in the cause of Virtue, Liberty, and Wisdom--to resist boldly, both for the advantage of the Order and of the world, Superstition and Despotism. I never will prefer my own private interest to that of the Order. I will defend my Brethren against calumny. I will dedicate my life to the discovery of the true Religion and real doctrines of Freemasonry, and I will impart my discoveries to my Superiors. I will disclose the secrets of my heart to my Superiors as to my best friends. So long as I shall remain in the Order I shall look upon the being a Member of it as a supreme felicity. I also engage to look upon all my domestic, civil, and social duties as most sacred. So help me God, both for the happiness of my life, and for the peace of my mind." In return for this oath the Prefect declares to the Candidate that he is going to create him a Knight of St. Andrew, according to the ancient usage of the Scotch--"Rise," he says, "and in future beware of ever bending thy knee before him who is only man like thyself." [*6] To these ceremonies the adept Knigge added a certain number of others which were mere derisions of the rites of the Church. Such, for example, was the triple benediction which the Priest pronounced over the new Knight, such the atrocious mockery of the last supper, which terminated the ceremony. But, impious as is the imitation, Weishaupt declares it to be disgusting because it is still religious, theosophical, and borrowed from superstition. [*7] But what perfectly coincided with the views of the Bavarian founder were, the instructions given to the new Knight. He is enraptured with that discourse, where one may observe the Illuminizing Orator selecting the most impious, artful, and disorganizing systems of Masonry, to make them at once the mysteries of their Masonic Lodges, and an immediate preparation for those of Illuminism. Let the reader recal to mind what was said in the Second Volume of these Memoirs [*8] concerning the Apocalypse of the Martinists, entitled Of Errors and of Truth. He will there have read of a time when man, disengaged from the senses and free from matter, was still more free from the yoke of the laws and from political bondage, to which he was only subjected by his fall. He will there have seen, that the daily efforts of man should tend to the overthrow of Governments, that he may recover his former purity and ancient liberty, and thus retrieve his fall. I might there have demonstrated that absurd Idealism reducing our senses to vain fictions, that the prostitution of them might be but a chimerical crime; [*9] there, in short, I might have shown, according to the Martinist, that in all ages this system of corruption and disorder has been the doctrine and secret of true Philosophy. This intermediary degree was destined by Weishaupt to serve as a point of union between the Masonic Lodges and Illuminism. It was but natural that the should have selected the most [p. 463] monstruous and most artful system of the Craft. Let not the reader therefore be astonished when he sees the Antitheosophist, the Atheist, the Materialist Weishaupt borrowing in this degree the doctrines of the Martinists on the twofold principle or double spirit. But let it be also remembered, that whenever, in consequence of this artifice, he is obliged to use the words spirit or soul, he informs the candidate, that such words are employed in the Code only to conform to the vulgar expression. This precaution taken, the Initiator may without apprehension repeat the sophisticated lessons on the twofold principle. And indeed one might be tempted to think, that the doctrines he lays down as the grand object of Free Masonry had all been copied from the Martinist system. He begins by deploring a great Revolution which had in former ages deprived man of his primitive dignity. He then represents man as having had the faculty of recovering his ancient splendour; but that by the abuse of his faculties he had again immersed himself still deeper in his defiled and degraded station. The very senses are blunted, and said to lead him into error on the nature of things. Every thing that he beholds in its actual state is falsehood, show, and illusion; and he lays particular stress on those schools of sages which had, ever since the time of the grand Revolution, preserved the secret principles of the antique doctrines, or of true Masonry. Nor does the Hierophant blush at placing JESUS OF NAZARETH among those sages, and blasphemously numbering the God of the Christians among the Grand Masters of Illuminism. But soon was the doctrine of Christ falsified, and Priests and Philosophers raised on these divine foundations an edifice of folly, prejudice, and self-interest. Soon also does the tyranny of Priesthood and the Despotism of Princes coalesce in the oppression of suffering humanity. Free Masonry opposes these disastrous attempts, and endeavors to preserve the true doctrine; but it has it with symbols, and its lodges gradually subside into seminaries of ignorance and error.--The Illuminees alone are in possession of the real secrets of Masonry; many of them are even still to be the objects of their researches; and the new Knight is to devote all his attention to their discovery. He is particularly recommended to study the doctrines of the ancient Gnostics and Manichaeans, which may lead him to many important discoveries on this real Masonry. He is also told, that the great enemies which he will have to encounter during this investigation will be ambition and other vices which make humanity groan under the oppression of Princes and of the Priesthood. [*10] The obscurity which enwraps these lessons on the new and grand Revolution which is to counteract the ravages of the former, is not the slightest of Weishaupt's artifices. With respect to Princes, this is the last degree to which they are admitted. They are to be persuaded, that the antique Revolution was no other than the coalition of the powers of the earth with the Priesthood, in order to support the empire of religious prejudice and superstition; and that the new Revolution to be effected is the re-union of Princes with Philosophy, to overthrow that empire and ensure the triumph of reason. Should the serene adept be startled at his having sworn never to flatter the great, nor to be a slave of Princes, he will be reconciled again by the latter part [p. 464] of the oath, where he engages to look upon his domestic, civil, and social duties as most sacred. But let him form what opinion he may as to his initiation, he has nevertheless sworn, that he will protect the Brotherhood from superstition and despotism; that he will obey the most excellent superiors of the Order; that he will favour its progress with all his power, and that he believes it alone to be in possession of the secrets of real Masonry. In the less important class of adepts, should any still hanker after their Theosophical ideas, that is to say, should Weishaupt despair of ever infusing into them its Anarchical and Atheistical principles, they are condemned to become stationary in this degree; and he imposes on them as a task the explication of all the Hieroglyphics of Masonry, which they may set to the tune of the grand Revolution. Under pretence of discovering a more perfect religion, he persuaded them that Christianity was at this day nothing more than superstition and tyranny. He has infused into them his hatred for the Priesthood and the existing forms of Government. That will suffice to procure him agents of destruction; as to , he has not so much as mentioned it to them. But should there be found among the number of Knights men who of themselves dive into the meaning of that great Revolution which only deprived man of his primitive dignity by subjecting him to the laws of civil society, should they have comprehended the meaning of this other Revolution, which is to restore every thing by re-establishing man in his primitive independence, such men will be pointed out by the Scrutators. It is at them that the Code particularly aims when it says, Let the Scotch Knights seriously reflect, that they are presiding over a grand establishment, whose object is the happiness of mankind. In short, these Knights have to act the parts of Superiors in the Order; they are the Inspectors or the Directors of all the preparatory class. They have on that account assemblies peculiar to themselves, called Secret Chapters. The first duty of these chapters is to watch over the interests of the Order within their district. "The Scotch Knights," says their first instruction, "are to pay particular attention to the discovery of any plans which may contribute to fill the coffers of the Order. It were much to be wished that they could devise means of putting the Order into possession of some considerable revenues in their province.--He that shall have rendered so signal a service must never hesitate at believing that these revenues are employed in the most noble purposes.--The whole must labour with all their might to consolidate the edifice little by little within their district, until the finances of the Order shall be found to be competent to its views." [*11] The second part of the Code entrusts these Knights with the government of the preparatory class. Each Knight is to correspond with a certain number of Brethren who have the direction of the Minerval academies. The Code contains instructions which point out to them upon what objects they are permitted to decide; what Brethren they are to forward or thwart in their promotion; and what reports they are to make to their Superiors. In their correspondence with their Inferiors they make use of the common cypher, but when they write to the chiefs they employ a peculiar character which may truly be called Hieroglyphic. [p. 465] They are particularly charged with the inspection of the Major Illuminees. "The Scotch Knights," says the Code, "shall be particularly attentive that the Major Illuminees do not neglect to mention in their monthly letters such employments as they may have to dispose of." [*12] I have shown, in the foregoing chapter, how useful and indeed how necessary this precaution proved for recompensing the zeal of the Brethren. The adept Knigge wished to demonstrate that it might be equally useful for princes, when combined with the scrutinizing Code. "Let us suppose," says he, "that a Prince, having an Illuminee for his Minister, wishes to find a proper person to fill any vacant office; by means of the Scrutators, the Minister may immediately present the faithful portrait of divers personages, from among whom the Prince will only have to make his election." [*13]--But every reader, I hope, will recollect, that in consequence of the oath that has been taken by the Minister to dispose of all places in favour of the Brethren, and that according to the direction of the Knights, he will only present such adepts for those offices as the Order shall have chosen; and thus will Illuminism soon dispose of all benefices, employments, and dignities, and have the entire direction of the whole power of the State. Meanwhile, until the Sect shall exert this influence over Courts, the Scotch Knights are to acquire an absolute sway in the Masonic Lodges. Their laws on this head deserve particular attention. We shall select the following: "In every town of any note situated within their district, the Secret Chapters shall establish Lodges for the three ordinary degrees, and shall cause men of sound morals, of good repute, and of easy circumstances, to be received in these Lodges. Such men are much to be sought after, and are to be made Masons, even though they should not be of any service to Illuminism in its ulterior projects." [*14] "If there already exists a Lodge in any given town, the Knights of Illuminism must find means of establishing a more legitimate one; at least, they should spare no pains to gain the ascendancy in those which they find established, either to reform or to destroy them." [*15] "They must strongly exhort the members of our lodges not to frequent (without leave of their Superiors) any of those pretended constituted lodges, who hold nothing of the English but their diplomas, and some few symbols and ceremonies which they do not understand. All such Brethren are perfectly ignorant of true Masonry, of its grand object, and its real patrons. Though some of the greatest merit are to be found in such lodges, we nevertheless have strong reasons for not readily allowing them to visit ours." [*16] "Our Scotch Knights must pay great attention to the regularity of the subordinate lodges, and must above all things attend to the preparation of candidates. It is here that in a private intercourse they will show a man that they have probed him to the quick. Surprise him by some ensnaring question in order to observe whether he has any presence of mind. If he be not staunch to his principles, and should expose his weak side, make him feel how great his necessities are, and how necessary it is for him to be guided entirely by us." [*17] [p. 466] "The Deputy Master of the Lodge (who is generally the auditor of the accounts) must also be a member of our Secret Chapter. He will persuade the lodges that they alone dispose of their funds; but he will take care to employ them according to the views of the Order. Should it at any time be necesssary to help one of our brethren, the proposition is made to the lodge; though the brother should not even be a Mason, no matter, some expedient must be found to carry the point." "No part of the capital, however, must in any case be alienated, that hereafter we may find the necessary funds for the most important undertakings. The tenth part of the subscriptions of these lodges must be annually carried to the Secret Chapter. The treasurer to whom these funds must be transmitted, shall collect them, and endeavour by all kinds of expedients to augment them." [*18] "But before any part of our own funds are appropriated to the help of any of our Brethren, every effort shall be made to procure the necessary succours from the funds belonging to lodges which do not pertain to our system.--In general, the money which these lodges spend in a useless manner, should be converted to the advancement of our grand object." [*19] "Whenever a learned Mason shall enter our Order, he must be put under the immediate direction of our Scotch Knights." [*20] From what code can Weishaupt, or his compiler Knigge, have selected such laws as these for their Scotch Knights? Many readers will be ready to answer, that they must have learned them from a Mandrin, a Cartouche, or some hero of the gibbet. But it is no such thing:--their own ingenuity was sufficient to invent such doctrines. Weishaupt lays down as a principle, that the end justifies the means: he made the application of it when he taught his adepts to rob the libraries of Princes and Religious Orders; his compiler Knigge applies the same principle to the funds of the honest Masons; and we shall soon see what use they made of those funds. It will be in vain for the Illuminee (more zealous for the honour of his founder than for that of the compiler Knigge) to object, that Weishaupt never approved of the degree of Scotch Knight. It is true, he never much admired it. But it is not the system of theft (evidently deduced from his own principles) that he reprobates; not a single expression in any of his letters can denote that he did so; for Knigge might have answered, what do those fools of Masons do with that money? just as Weishaupt had written what do those rascals of Monks do with their rare books? He blamed it not for its principles, but because he thought it a miserable composition: der elende Scottische ritter grade are the terms in which he expresses his contempt. When he corrected this degree, the thefts were not the parts which he expunged; they were too serviceable to the order. Weishaupt, however, consented to let this degree (such as it was) serve as a preparation for the mysteries of his Epoptes; that is to say, for his priests of Illuminism; and when considered in that light it may be truly said, that the Knights brigands were but pitiful and miserable indeed. I will, however, give the reader an opportunity of judging for himself. [p. 467] [p. 468] Footnotes ^468:1 Original Writings, Vol. II. Part I. Sect. 11. ^468:2 See this degree, Sect. 4, No. 2 and 3. ^468:3 See second Instruction for this degree, No. 8. ^468:4 Ibid. ^468:5 Ibid. Reversal Letters. ^468:6 Ibid. Sect. 7. ^468:7 See the Last word of Philo, Page 100. ^468:8 Chap. XI. ^468:9 When treating in the Second Volume of the religious and political tenets of the Martinists, I did not extend my to their doctrine of Idealism, and I frankly confess that I did not sufficiently understand that part of their Apocalypse. Since the publication of that Volume, however, I have met with a Gentleman capable of comprehending any intelligible system whatever; I mean the Abbe Bertins, residing at present at Oxford. He reproached me in terms similar to those in which some other people had reproached me respecting the Rosicrucians. What you have written, said he, is ALL true, but you have not told the WHOLE truth. I had indeed said a great deal of those gentry, and I never will advance any point which I cannot prove. The Abbe Bertins condescended to give me some little insight into the doctrines of this famous St. Martin. It fully confirmed every thing which I had advanced on the tenets of the Martinists, with respect to the nature of the soul, and to the pretended origin of that soul forming a part of God, of the essence of God, and of the same substance--But what I had not said was, that according to the same system matter has no real existence, or at least has such a separate existence, and is so entirely null with respect to the soul, that there neither is nor can be any relation whatever between it and the soul; in fine, that it is, with respect to us, as if it were not. I had surmised these consequences in a which I had had with an estimable young man, the Vicomte de Maimbourg, whom the Martinists had endeavoured to taint with their erroneous doctrines. When they came to treat of the pleasure of the senses, throw that to the fire, they say in their treatise of morality; to the fire: give to the fire all it asks; that is not the spirit, all that does not affect the soul; and this fire is matter; it is the senses, the body. It is not in the same sense that the Martinist tells us, "It is in vain that the enemy pursues me with his illusions. Matter shall not have remembrance of me here below. Does man taste the pleasures of matter? When the senses feel pain or pleasure, is it not easy to perceive that it is not man that feels this pain or pleasure?" (No. 235, of the Man of Desire, by the Author of a work On Errors and on Truth). How frightful is this enigmatical language! If all the passions and senses are foreign to man, if he may gratify them with affecting his soul either for the better or for the worse, what monstrous consequences must ensue to morals! And indeed a Danish Martinist was consulted by the Viscount, who, more candid than the recruiting Brethren, answered, "Beware, dear Sir, of ever entering into our mysteries;--I am unfortunately engaged, and should in vain attempt to withdraw myself from them. I could not succeed; but, for your part, take care never to deliver yourself over to those men." The Viscount followed his advice. As to the Abbe Bertins, he was too much for Mr. de St. Martin, who had to argue with a man that perpetually objected--if my soul is part of God, and of the substance of God, my soul must be God. After three months lessons, which the reader will readily suppose the Abbe Bertins only submitted to through curiosity, the learned teacher violently exclaimed, "I see I never shall be able to convince [p. 468] a Divine:" and thus Mr. de St. Martin took leave of a scholar far more fitted to teach him real knowledge than to receive his sophisticated lessons. ^468:10 See this degree, Art. 8. Instruction on the Masonic Hieroglyphics. ^468:11 See First Instruction for this degree. ^468:12 Second Instruction, No. 12. ^468:13 Last Observations of Philo, Page 95. ^468:14 Third Instruction for the same degree, No. 1. ^468:15 Third Instruction for the same degree, No. 3. ^468:16 Ibid. No. 5. ^468:17 Ibid. No. 9. ^468:18 Third Instruction for the same degree, No. 12. ^468:19 Ib. 13. ^468:20 Third Instruction for the same degree, No. 16. Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford [1798], at sacred-texts.com [p. 469] CHAP. IX. Seventh Part of the Code of the Illuminees.--Class of the Mysteries.--Of the lesser Mysteries; the Epopt or Priest of Illuminism. HOWEVER accurately the Sect may have ascertained the progress of its adepts in the preparatory degrees, still Weishaupt seems to fear that some may be startled when they come to be acquainted with the ultimate views of Illuminism. He wishes therefore to lead them to his darkest plots by gradual shades. Hence the division of lesser and greater mysteries, and the subdivision into degrees. The first degree into which the adepts are initiated in this class is that of Epopt; but these new dignitaries are only known by that title to the inferior class; the higher degrees call them Priests. [*1] Let not the reader take alarm at the denomination of lesser mysteries, as if they were of no consequence; for he will gradually, as he ascends, discover their dark designs and dealings. But before the adept is allowed to proceed, he must collect every thing that his mind, his memory, or all his former lessons can afford, of anti-religious and anti-social principles, to enable him to give written answers to the following questions: "I. Do you think the present state of nations corresponds with the object for which man was placed upon earth? For example, do governments, civil associations, or religion, attain the ends for which they were designed? Do the sciences to which men apply furnish them with real lights; are they conducive (as they ought to be) to real happiness? Are they not, on the contrary, the offspring of numberless wants, and of the unnatural state in which men live? Are they not the crude inventions of crazy brains, or of geniuses laboriously subtle?" "II. What civil associations and what sciences do you think tend or do not tend to the grand object? Did there not formerly exist an order of things more simple? What sort of an idea can you form of that ancient state of the world?" "III. Now that we have passed through all those nullities (or through all those useless and vain forms of our civil constitutions), do you think that it would be possible to return back to the original and noble simplicity of our forefathers? Supposing we had returned to it, would not our past misfortunes render that state more durable? Would not all mankind be in a similar state [p. 470] with an individual who, having enjoyed the sweets of innocence during his childhood, and fallen a prey to error and his passions during his youth, at length, instructed by the risks he has run, and by experience, endeavours to return to that innocence and purity which rendered his childhood so happy?" "IV. What means were best to be employed for restoring mankind to that happy state? Should it be by public measures, by violent revolutions, or by any means that should ensure success?" "V. Does not the Christian Religion in all its purity afford some indications, does it not hint at some state or happiness similar to this? Does it not even prepare it?" "VI. Is this holy and simple religion really what different Sects profess it to be at this present day, or is it more perfect?" "VII. Can this more perfect Christianity be known or taught? Could the world (such as it now is) support a stronger degree of light? Do you not think that, before the numberless obstacles could be removed, it would be proper to preach to mankind a religion more perfect, a philosophy more elevated, and the art of each one's governing himself according to his greatest advantage?" "VIII. Would not our moral and political views lead men to oppose this blessing? From our political and moral views then, or from an ill-judged interest, or even from deep-rooted prejudices, these obstacles originate. If men, therefore, oppose the renovation of human happiness, is it not because, slaves to ancient forms, they reject and reprobate every thing which is not to be found in those forms, though it should be the most natural, the grandest, and most noble of all possible things? Does not personal interest, alas! at present predominate over the general interest of mankind?" "IX. Must we not then silently and gradually remedy those disorders before we can flatter ourselves with the re-establishment of the golden age? Meanwhile, is it not adviseable to disseminate the truth in Secret Societies?" "X. Can we trace any such secret doctrine in the ancient schools of the sages, or in the allegorical lessons given by Jesus Christ, the Saviour and liberator of mankind, to his most intimate disciples? Have you not observed a sort of gradual education in that art which you see has been transmitted to our Order, from the highest antiquity?" [*2] Should the answers of the Candidate to all these questions show that the progress he has made in his gradual education is not what the Order had reason to expect, he will solicit in vain the advancement he hoped for. Should his answers be equivocal, he will receive orders to prepare new ones, or to be more explicit. [*3] But if he show the proper dispositions, and the Sect foresee no probability of his being startled at the lessons of the Hierophant on those grand objects which are to be disclosed to him, the Superiors give their assent, and a synod of the illuminized priesthood is held. The day of the initiation is fixed. At the hour agreed upon, the introducing adept waits upon his new proselyte and takes him into a carriage. The windows being closed, the Candidate blind-folded, and the coachman continually winding and varying his course, are precautions more than sufficient to hinder the proselyte from [p. 471] ever being able to trace the spot to which he is conducted. Led by the hand, and still blind-folded, he slowly ascends to the porch of the temple of the mysteries. His guide then divests him of the Masonic insignia, puts a drawn sword into his hand, takes off the bandage from his eyes, and leaves him, strictly forbidding him to proceed a step until he hears the voice which is to call him. He is then left to his reflections. With respect to the pomp of the mysteries, when the Brethren celebrate them in all their splendour, the walls of the temple are hung in red, and lighted up with an immense number of candles or lamps. A voice is at length heard, saying, "Come, enter, unhappy fugitive! The fathers wait for you; enter and shut the door after you." The proselyte the voice which calls him. At the bottom of the temple he beholds a throne under a rich canopy with a table before it, on which lie a crown, a sceptre, a sword, some pieces of gold money, and precious jewels, all interlaid with chains. At the foot of this table, on a scarlet cushion, is thrown a white robe, a girdle, and the simple ornaments of the sacerdotal costume. The proselyte, standing at the bottom of the temple and in front of the throne, is addressed by the Hierophant as follows: "Behold and fix thine eyes on the splendour of the throne. If all this childish mummery, these crowns, these scepters, and all these monuments of human degradation, have any charms in your eyes, speak; and it may be in our power to gratify your wishes. Unhappy man! if such are your objects, if you wish to rise to power that you may assist in the oppression of your Brethren, go, and at your peril make the trial. Are you in quest of power, of force, of false honours, and of such superfluities, we will labour for you; we will procure such transient advantages for you, we will place you as near the throne as you can desire, and will leave you to the consequences of your folly; but observe, our sanctuary shall be for ever shut against you. "On the contrary, do you wish to be initiated into wisdom, would you teach the art of rendering men better, more free and more happy, then be welcome, be thrice welcome. Here you behold the attributes of Royalty, and there, on the cushion, you see the modest vestment of innocence; make thy choice, and let it be the choice which thy heart shall dictate." If, contrary to all expectations, the Candidate should make choice of the Regalia, he hears a thundering voice exclaim, "Monster, retire! cease to pollute this holy place! Begone, fly, before it is too late." At these words he is led out of the temple by the Brother who introduced him.--But should he chuse the white robe, how different will be the language! "Health and salutation to thy great and noble soul! Such was the choice we expected from you. But stop; it is not permitted to you to invest yourself with that robe, until you have learned to what you are in future destined by us." [*4] The Candidate is then ordered to be seated. The Code of the Mysteries is opened, and the Brethren in silence attend to the oracles of the Hierophant. Now, reader, you who have been through so long a course of trials, questions, rituals, and insidious degrees; who have been led through all the preparatory labyrinth of illuminized education, if still you be in the dark as to [p. 472] the object of such precautions and artifices, follow me into this den which the Sect dares to call the holy place; seat thyself by the adept, and listen to their Oracles.--This is the master-piece of the founder. Hear with patience, though your indignation should be excited by his monstrous fertility in Sophism, in impiety, in blasphemy against your gospel and your God, treachery against your Magistrates, your country, and its laws, against your titles and your rights, against those of your ancestors and your progeny--Let Kings and Subjects, the rich and poor, the merchant and the labourer, let every class of citizens attend; let them hearken, and learn at length what hellish plots are contriving against them in the dark recesses of these diabolical dens. In vain shall the lethargic soul accuse us of credulity or groundless terrors. Those lessons which the Sect view as the master-piece of their code lie before me, such as they flowed from the pen of the Legislator, such as they were published by order of the Sovereign who seized the archives of the Sect, that all nations might learn the dreadful dangers with which they were menaced. [*5] I have them again embellished by the compiler of the Sect, corrected and reviewed by the Council of the Areopagites, attested by the compiler as true and conformable to the copy signed and sealed with the signet of the Sect. [*6] Read then, and rock thyself to sleep in the cradle of voluntary ignorance if thou canst, content with having assured thyself that every conspiracy against the existence of civil society or of all government whatever, every conspiracy against the existence of property, can be but a chimera. It is to the Candidate, and in presence of the Brethren already initiated to these mysteries, that the Illuminizing President addresses the following discourse: Discourse of the Hierophant for the Degree of Priest or Epopt of the Illuminees. [*7] "At length (he says) the time of your reward succeeds to the trials of an assiduous preparation. At present you know yourself, and have learned to know others; you are what you ought to be, such as we wished to see you. It will now be your duty to conduct others.--What you already know, and what you are about to learn, will expose to your view the extreme weakness of human nature. In this advantage alone lies the true source of power which one man exercises over another. The dark clouds dissipate; the sun of light rises; the gates of the sanctuary unfold; a portion of our mysteries is going to be revealed to you. Let the gates of the temple be shut against the prophane; I will only speak to the Illustrious, to the Holy, to the Elect. I speak to those who have ears to hear, who have tongues which they can command, and who have minds sufficiently enlightened to understand. "Surrounded by the Illustrious, you are about to enter into that class which bears an essential part in the government of our sublime Order. But do you know what it is to govern, can you conceive what this right can be in a secret society? To exercise such an empire, not over the vulgar or the grandees [p. 473] of the people, but over the most accomplished men, over men in all stations, of all nations, of all religions; to reign over them without any exterior constraint, to keep them united by durable bonds, to inspire them all with one spirit; to govern with all possible precision, activity, and silence, men spread over the whole surface of the globe, even to its utmost confines. This is a problem which no political wisdom has ever been able to solve. To reunite the distinctions of Equality, Despotism, and Liberty; to prevent the treasons and persecutions which would be the inevitable consequences; of nothing, to create great things; to stand firm against the swelling torrent of evils and abuse; to make happiness universally shine on human nature; would be a master-piece of morality and polity re-united. The civil constitutions of states offer but little aid to such an undertaking. Fear and violence are their grand engines; with us, each one is voluntarily to lend his assistance. . . . Were men what they ought to be, we might on their first admission into our society explain the greatness of our plans to them; but the lure of a secret is perhaps the only means of retaining those who might turn their backs upon us as soon as their curiosity had been gratified: The ignorance or imperfect education of many makes it requisite that they should be first formed by our moral lessons. The complaints, the murmurs of others against the trials to which we are obliged to condemn them, sufficiently show you what pains we must bestow, with what patience and what constancy we must be endowed; how intensely the love of the grand object must glow in our hearts, to make us keep true to our posts in the midst of such unthankful labour; and not abandon for ever the hope of regenerating mankind." "It is to partake with us of these labours that you have been called. To observe others day and night; to form them, to succour them, to watch over them; to stimulate the courage of the pusillanimous, the activity and the zeal of the lukewarm; to instruct the ignorant; to raise up those who have fallen, to fortify those who stagger; to repress the ardour of rashness, to prevent disunion; to veil the faults and weaknesses of others; to guard against the acute inquisitiveness of wit; to prevent imprudence and treason; in short, to maintain the subordination to and esteem of our Superiors, and friendship and union among the Brethren, are the duties, among others still greater, that we impose upon you." "Have you any idea of secret societies; of the rank they hold, or of the parts they perform in the events of this world? Do you view them as insignificant or transient meteors? O, Brother! God and Nature, when disposing of all things according to the proper times and places, had their admirable ends in view; and they make use of these secret societies as the only and as the indispensable means of conducting us thither." "Hearken, and may you be filled with admiration! This is the point whither all the moral tends; it is on this that depends the knowledge of the rights of secret societies, of all our doctrine, of all our ideas of good and bad, of just and unjust. You are here situated between the world past and the world to come. Cast your eyes boldly on what has passed, and in an instant ten [p. 474] thousand bolts shall fall, and thousands of gates shall burst open to futurity--You shall behold the inexhaustible riches of God and of Nature, the degradation and the dignity of man. You shall see the world and human nature in its youth, if not in its childhood, even there where you thought to find it in its decrepitude and verging toward its ruin and ignominy." Should this long exordium, which I have nevertheless abridged, have fatigued the reader, let him rest and reflect for an instant. The enthusiastic strain which predominates in this first part pervades the whole. Weishaupt thought it necessary to his object to afford his proselytes no time for reflection. He begins by inflaming them; he promises great things; though this impious and artful mountebank knows that he is going to fob them off with the greatest follies, the grossest impieties and errors. I have called him an impious and artful mountebank; but that is falling far short of what the proofs attest. Weishaupt knows that he deceives, and wishes to delude his proselytes in the most atrocious manner. When he has misled, he scoffs at them, and with his confidants derides their imbecility. He has, however, his reasons for beguiling them, and knows for what uses he intends them when he has infused into them his erroneous and vicious principles. The greater the consideration they may enjoy in the world, the more heartily he laughs at their delusion. He thus writes to his intimate friends: "You cannot conceive how much my degree of Priest is admired by our people. But what is the most extraordinary is, that several great protestant and reformed divines, who are of our Order, really believe that that part of the discourse which alludes to religion contains the true spirit and real sense of Christianity; poor mortals! what could I not make you believe?--Candidly I own to you, that I never thought of becoming the founder of a religion." [*8] In this manner does the impostor delude his followers, and then scoffs at them in private. These great divines were probably of that class among the protestants which we should, among us, call apostates, a Syeyes or an Autun, for example; for it is impossible that any man endowed with common sense or candour could avoid seeing that the whole tendency of this long discourse is the total overthrow of all religion and of all government. A second observation well worthy the notice of our readers is, the extreme importance which the Sect gives to secret societies, and what mighty expectations it grounds on their mysterious existence. Let nations and chiefs of nations examine themselves, reflect whether they have ever calculated the means and importance of these secret societies so well as those who founded them; and say, whether fear and diffidence on the one side should not keep pace with the expectations and confidence of the other. But let us return to the Lodge wherein Weishaupt initiates his adepts. Continuing his enthusiastic strain, the Hierophant informs the proselyte, that Nature, having a great plan to develope, begins by the lesser and most imperfect parts; that she then regularly proceeds to the middle terms, to bring things to a state of perfection; which state may serve as a point whence she may again depart, to raise them to a higher order of perfection. [p. 475] "Nature (says he) makes us begin at infancy, from infancy she raises us to manhood. She at first left us in the savage state, but soon brought us to civilization, perhaps that we might be more sensible, more enraptured and tenacious of what we are, from viewing the contrast of what we were. But to what changes, and those of an order infinitely more important, does our future destiny lead us!" Were the candidate master of his own reason, he must conclude from these principles, that human nature had acquired perfection when passing from the savage state to that of civil society; that if he. is still to acquire perfection it can never be by returning to his primitive state. But sophisters have their tortuosities, and the adepts are involved in a folly and blindness, with which the Almighty God permits them to be stricken, since they prefer error to truth, and impiety to Christianity. "As has the individual man (continues the Hierophant) so human nature in the aggregate has its childhood, its youth, its manhood, and its old age. At each of these periods mankind learn and are subject to fresh wants--hence arise their political and moral revolutions--It is at the age of manhood that human nature appears in all its dignity. It is then that, taught by long experience, man conceives at length how great a misfortune it is for hire to invade the rights of others, to avail himself of some few advantages, purely exterior, to raise himself, to the prejudice of others. It is then that he sees and feels the happiness and dignity of man." "The first age of mankind is that of savage and uncouth nature. A family is the whole society; hunger and thirst easily quenched, a shelter from the inclemency of the seasons, a woman, and, after fatigue, rest, are then the only wants. At that period men enjoyed the two most inestimable blessings EQUALITY and LIBERTY; they enjoyed them to their utmost extent; they would have forever enjoyed them, had they chosen to follow the track which Nature had traced for them--or had it not entered the plans of God and Nature first to show man for what happiness he was destined; happiness the more precious, as he had begun by tasting it; happiness so early lost, but instantaneously regretted and fruitlessly sought after, until he should have learned how to make proper use of his strength, and how to conduct himself in his intercourse with the rest of mankind. In his primitive state he was destitute of the conveniencies of life, but he was not on that account unhappy; not knowing them, he did not feel the want of them. Health was his ordinary state, and physical pain was his only source of uneasiness--Oh happy mortals! who were not sufficiently enlightened to disturb the repose of your mind, or to feel those great agents of our miseries the love of power and of distinctions, the propensity to sensuality, the thirst after the representative signs of all wealth, those truly original sins with all their progeny, envy, avarice, intemperance, sickness, and all the tortures of imagination!" Thus we see this primitive and savage state, this first essay of Nature, already transformed (in the mouth of the Hierophant) into the happiest state that man ever knew: Equality and Liberty are the sovereign principles of happiness in that state. Should the reader be as much blinded as the proselyte, [p. 476] and not see whither all this is tending, let him proceed, and hear how man was deprived of this happiness by the institution of civil societies. "An infortunate germ soon vivifies in the breast of man, and his primitive peace and felicity disappear." "As families multiplied, the means of subsistence began to fail; the nomade (or roaming) life ceased, and PROPERTY started into existence; men chose habitations; agriculture made them intermix. Language became universal; living together, one man began to measure his strength with another, and the weaker were distinguished from the stronger. This undoubtedly created the idea of mutual defence, of one individual governing divers families reunited, and of thus defending their persons and their fields against the invasion of an enemy; but hence LIBERTY was ruined in its foundation, and EQUALITY disappeared." "Oppressed with wants unknown until that period, man perceived that his own powers were no longer sufficient. To supply this defect, the weakest imprudently submitted to the strongest or to the wisest; not however to be ill-treated, but that he might be protected, conducted, and enlightened.--All submission, therefore, even of the most unpolished mortal, has an existence only in as much as he wants the person to whom he subjects himself, and on the express condition that that person can succour him. His power ceases when my weakness no longer exists, or when another acquires superiority. Kings are fathers; the paternal power is at an end when the child has acquired his strength. The father would offend his children if he pretended to prolong his rights beyond that term. Every man having attained to years of discretion may govern himself, when a whole nation therefore is arrived at that period, there can exist no further plea for keeping it in wardship. " In putting such language into the mouth of the Hierophant, the founder of Illuminism had too well studied the strength and illusion of words; he had been too cautious in the choice and preparation of his adepts ever to fear that any of them would answer, "You who thus give oracles, what do you understand by nations having attained their majority? Without doubt such as, having emerged from ignorance and barbarism, have acquired the lights necesssary for their happiness; and to what can they be indebted for these lights and this happiness, if not to their civil association? It will be then, if ever, that they will find it both reasonable and necessary to remain under the guardianship of their laws and of their government, lest they should fall back into the barbarism and ignorance of the roaming clans, or be precipitated into the horrors of anarchy, from revolution to revolution, under the successive of the brigand, of the executioner of the sophisticated despot, or under that of a sophister Syeyes and his colegislative Marsellois, of a Robespierre and his guillotines, of the Triumvirs and their proscriptions. The populace alone in the minority of ignorance, the sophisters alone in the majority of wickedness and corruption, shall applaud thy mysteries." Certain of not meeting with such reflexions from the adepts, the Hierophant continues to inculcate his principles by attributing every thing to strength, and destroying all principles of morality or of reason, though he will [p. 477] affect the tone of both; and ends by forming his judgment on man in society, as he would judge tigers and wild beasts in the forests.--These are his new doctrines. "Never did strength submit to weakness.--Nature has destined the weak to serve, because they have wants; the strong man to govern, because he can be useful. Let the one lose his force, and the other acquire it, they will then change situations, and he that obeyed will command. He that stands in need of another, also depends upon him, and he has renounced to him his rights. Hence few wants is the first step towards liberty. It is for this reason that the savages are the most enlightened of men, and perhaps they alone are free. [*9] When wants are durable, servitude is also lasting. Safety is a durable want. Had men refrained from all injustice, they would have remained free; it was injustice which made them bend beneath the yoke. To acquire safety, they deposited the whole force in the hands of one man; and thus created a new evil, that of fear. The work of their own hands frightened them; and to live in safety they robbed themselves of that very safety. This is the cause of our governments.--Where then shall we find a protecting force? In union; but how rare, alas! is that union, except in our new and secret associations, better guided by wisdom, and leagued in straiter bonds! and hence it is that nature itself inclines us toward these associations." Subtle as is the artifice in this description of human nature, and in that affectation of beholding on the one side nothing but tyrants and despots, and on the other only oppressed and trembling slaves in the state of society; whatever share Nature may have had in the institution of social order, or in reclaiming mankind from forests and wildernesses to live under laws and a common chief; the Hierophant nevertheless exultingly exclaims, "Such is the faithful and philosophic picture of despotism and of liberty, of our wishes and of our fears. Despotism was engrafted on liberty, and from despotism shall liberty once more spring. The re-union of men in society is at once the cradle and the grave of despotism; it is the grave and cradle of liberty. We were once possessed of liberty, and we lost it but to find it again and never lose it more; to learn by the very privation of it the art of better enjoying it in future." Reader, observe these words; if they do not evidently point out the object of the Sect, if you do not perceive the wish of bringing mankind back to those times of the nomade herds of savages, and of men destitute of property, laws, or government, read and convince yourself by what follows: "Nature drew men from the savage state and re-united them in civil societies; from these societies we proceed to further wishes, and to a wiser choice (aus den staaten tretten wir in neue kluger gewahlte). New associations present themselves to these wishes, and by their means we return to the state whence we came, not again to run the former course, but better to enjoy our new destiny--let us explain this mystery." "Men then had passed from their peaceable state to the yoke of servitude; Eden, that terrestrial paradise, was lost to them. Subjects of sin and slavery, they were reduced to servitude and obliged to gain their bread by the sweat of their brow.--In the number of these men some promised to protect, and thus became their [p. 478] chiefs--at first they reigned over herds or clans--these were soon conquered, or united together in order to form a numerous people; hence arose nations and their chiefs kings of nations. At the formation of states and nations, the world ceased to be a great family, to be a single empire; the great bond of nature was rent asunder." The impudence of such assertions must astonish the reader; he will ask himself can there possibly exist beings thus belying evidence itself, and pretending to show the universe forming but one and the same family, and the grand bond of nature in those roaming and scattered herds, where the child can scarcely walk when he is separated from his father? How is it possible to represent mankind as divorcing from the great family, at the very period when they unite under the same chiefs and the same laws, for their mutual protection and safety? But, reader, suspend thy indignation. Let us call up in evidence against the Sect those brigands and murderers which it decorated with the high-sounding title of Patriots, and which it stimulated to bloodshed and methodized murder by the fanaticizing sounds of people, nation, country. At the very time that they rend the air with such accents, with names so dear as they pretend, hear the maledictions which their mysteries heap upon every people, every nation, every country. At that period, when men re-united and formed nations, "they ceased to acknowledge a common name--Nationalism, or the love for a particular nation, took place of the general love. With the division of the globe, and of its states, benevolence was restrained within certain limits, beyond which it could no longer trespass.--Then it became a merit to extend the bounds of states at the expence of the neighbouring ones. Then it became lawful to abuse, offend, and despise foreigners, to attain that end--and this virtue was styled patriotism; and he was styled a patriot who, just toward his countrymen, and unjust to others, was blind to the merits of strangers, and believed the very vices of his own country to be perfections.--In such a case, why not restrain that love within a narrower compass, to citizens living in the same town, or to the members of one family; or why even should not each person have concentrated his affections in himself. We really beheld Patriotism generating Localism, the confined spirit of families, and at length Egoism. Hence the origin of states and governments, and of civil society, has really proved to be the seeds of discord, and Patriotism has found its punishment in itself . . .Diminish, reject that love of the country, and mankind will once more learn to know and love each other as men. Partiality being cast aside, that union of hearts will once more appear and expand itself--on the contrary, extend the bonds of Patriotism, and you will teach man that it is impossible to blame the closer contraction of love, to a single family, to a single person, in a word, to the strictest Egoism." But let us abridge these blasphemies. The Hierophant, under pretence of his universal love, may vent his spleen against the distinctions of Greeks or Romans, of French or English, of Italian or Spanish, of Pagan or Jew, of Christians or Mahometans, which denote nations and their religions: he may repeat, if he pleases, that amidst these different denominations that of man is [p. 479] overlooked; what will be the result of such declamation?--With our illuminizing doctor, in common with every class of the disorganizing Sophisters, is not this pretended universal love to be a cloak for the most odious hypocrisy? He only pretends to universal philanthropy, that he may dispense with loving his neighbour. He detests the love of one's country, only because he detests the laws of nations; he cannot even brook the love of one's family (he has given us a fine specimen in the person of his sister), and he will substitute that universal love because he is no more attached to them than he is to the Chinese, the Tartar, or the Hottentot, which he neither has seen nor ever will see, and that all human nature may be equally indifferent to him. He extends the bond that it may lose its elasticity and discontinue its action.--He calls himself citizen of the universe, that he may cease to be a citizen in his own country, a friend in society, or a fond father and dutiful child in his own family. His love, he tells us, extends from pole to pole, that he may love nothing that is near him. Such is the philanthropy of our Cosmopolites! The proselyte stands astonished in stupid admiration at these expressions of universal love.--The Hierophant proceeds to the Codes of Nations. Still in extasy at these doctrines, he learns that they are in direct opposition to the laws of nature; nor will he even perceive that his new code is in direct opposition to the very first laws of nature, as it eradicates the love of one's own family and that of one's country. Nor will he ask, why the fulfilling of his duty toward his fellow-countrymen should hinder him from treating the barbarian or the savage with proper affection? Then follow new sophisms, to persuade the adept that the original fault of man was, the dereliction of the Equality and Liberty of the savage state by the institution of civil laws. Here, more than ever, are calumny and hatred blended with enthusiasm by the Hierophant, who, reviewing the different ages of the world since the existence of civil institutions, pictures nations as groaning under oppression, despotism, and slavery, or glutted with the blood of wars and revolutions, which always terminate in tyranny. At one time it is the representation of Kings surrounding themselves with herds or legions called soldiers, in order to gratify their ambition by conquests on strangers, or to reign by terror over their enslaved subjects; at other times, it is the people themselves brandishing their arms, not to attack tyranny in its source, but merely to change their tyrants. If they think of giving themselves representatives, it is these very representatives, who, forgetting that they only hold their missions and powers from the people, form Aristocracies and Oligarchies, which all end by flowing into the general reservoir of Monarchy and Despotism. He never loses sight of his sophism of human nature degraded and vilified under the yoke of tyranny. These declamations, enthusiastically pronounced, at length make the proselyte exclaim, in unison with his master, "Are such then the consequences of the institution of states and of civil society? O folly! oh people! that you did not foresee the fate that awaited you; that you should yourselves have seconded your despots in degrading human nature to servitude, and even to the condition of the brute!" [p. 480] Could a true Philosopher have been present, his heart must have burst with generous indignation; he would have abruptly challenged the Hierophant to declare whence he had learned to metamorphose the annals of society into those of brigands and monsters? Is the history of man then reduced to the records of plagues, famines, storms, tempests, or of convulsed elements? Have no serene days shone on man? Shall the sun be represented as a malevolent object, because it is sometimes obscured by fogs or clouds? Are we to fly from our habitations because many have been destroyed by fire? Shall we curse life and health because we are subject to pains and infirmities? Why else this fable painting of the disasters which have in the course of ages befallen civil society? Why are we to be silent on the misfortunes from which it has preserved us, or on the advantages which it has heaped on man, in reclaiming him from the forests? But the voice of reason cannot penetrate into the den of conspiracy. The oracles of Weishaupt shall there be confidently repeated by the Hierophant. He draws nigher and nigher to the grand object, to the means of making those misfortunes disappear, which originate, as he pretends, in the institution of laws and governments. "Oh nature!" he continues, "how great and incontestible are thy rights? It is from the womb of disaster and mutual destruction that the means of safety spring! Oppression disappears because it meets with abettors, and reason regains its rights because people wish to stifle it. He, at least, who wishes to mislead others, should seek to govern them by the advantages of instruction and science. Kings themselves at length perceive, that there is little glory in reigning over ignorant herds--Legislators begin to acquire wisdom, and they favour property and industry:--perverse motives propagate the sciences, and Kings protect them as agents of oppression. Other men profit of them to investigate the origin of their rights. They at length seize on that unknown mean of forwarding a revolution in the human mind, and of thus triumphing for ever over oppression. But the triumph would be of short duration, and man would fall back into his degraded state, had not Providence in those distant ages husbanded the means which it has transmitted down to us, of secretly meditating and at length operating the salvation of human kind. "Those means are, the secret schools of Philosophy. Those schools have been in all ages the archives of nature and OF THE RIGHTS OF MAN. These schools shall one day retrieve the fall of human nature, AND PRINCES AND NATIONS SHALL DISAPPEAR FROM THE FACE OF THE EARTH, and that without any violence. Human nature shall form one great family, and the earth shall become the habitation of the man of reason.--Morality shall alone produce this great Revolution. The day shall come when each father shall, like Abraham and the Patriarchs, become the Priest and absolute Sovereign of his family. REASON SHALL BE THE ONLY BOOK OF LAWS, the sole Code of man. THIS IS ONE OF OUR GRAND MYSTERIES. Attend to the demonstration of it, and learn how it has been transmitted down to us." I have already said, that had my object been only to prove the reality of a Conspiracy formed by Illuminism against the existence of every society, [p. 481] every civil Code, and every nation; these lessons of the Hierophant would render every other proof superfluous. But that the reader may know the full extent of the dangers which threaten us, it is necesssary that he should be shown how those plots of frenzy become really transformed into plots of profound wickedness; that he should be acquainted with the means employed enthusiastically to inflame the minds of whole legions of adepts. Let us then attend to the Hierophant. If patience be necessary to follow him, greater still has it been necessary to enable me to transcribe such doctrines. "What strange blindness can have induced men to imagine that human nature was always to be governed as it has hitherto been. "Where shall we find a man acquainted with all the resources of nature? Who dare prescribe limits, and say thus far shalt thou proceed, and no farther, to that nature, whose law is unity in the variegated infinite? Whence shall issue the command, that it shall always run the same course, and for ever renew it again--Where is the being who has condemned men, the best, the wisest, and the most enlightened of men, to perpetual slavery? Why should human nature be bereft of its most perfect attribute, that of governing itself? Why are those persons to be always led who are capable of conducting themselves? Is it then impossible for mankind or at least the greater part, to come to their majority? If one be enabled to do it why should not another; show to one person what you have taught another; teach him the grand art of mastering his passions and regulating his desires; teach him, that from his earliest youth he stands in need of others; that he must abstain from giving offence if he wishes not to be offended; that he must be beneficent if he wishes to receive favours. Let him be patient, indulgent, wise, and benevolent. Let these virtues be made easy to him by principles, experience, and examples; and you will soon see whether he needs another to conduct him? If it be true, that the greater part of mankind are too weak or too ignorant to conceive these simple truths, and to be convinced by them; Oh then our happiness will be at an end, and let us cease to labour at rendering mankind better, or at seeking to enlighten them." "Oh prejudice! oh contradiction of the human mind! shall the empire of reason, the capacity of governing ourselves, be but a chimerical dream for the greater number of men, while on the other hand prejudice leads us to believe that such is the inherent right of the children of Kings, of reigning families, and of every man whom wisdom or particular circumstances render independent!" What horrid artifice is contained in these sentences! The poor proselyte really imagines that he sees the most striking contradictions in the very foundations of our civil societies. He really thinks that we believe them to rest on the hereditary privilege of Kings and of their children, to be born with all the necessary wisdom to conduct themselves, while nature has refused such gifts to other mortals; though Weishaupt, who scoffs in private at the credulity and folly of his adepts, knows as well as we do, that such has never been the idea even of the most ignorant populace. He that we believe Kings to be born children like other men, with the same weaknesses, the same passions, [p. 482] and like incapacity; he knows as well as we do, that the gift of conducting ourselves and others is to be acquired by education, and by the helps and lights with which a man may be encompassed; and we know as well as he does, that the child of the most obscure parentage would often make a better king than many Sovereigns; as he might also be an excellent magistrate, or a great general, had he received a proportionate education. But does there hence follow any contradiction in civil society, because, uncertain as to the persons who would be the most proper for governing, but certain of the intrigues and broils which would accompany the election of Kings, it has obviated those inconveniencies by hereditary crowns and empires? And after all, what is the meaning of that sophisticated pretence founded on the of being able to conduct oneself? Question the most prudent and the wisest of men, and he will readily say, though I do not stand in need of laws, magistrates, or Kings, to restrain me from being unjust toward others, or from oppressing and plundering, I yet want their assistance to secure me from being oppressed or plundered. The less I am inclined to injure others, the more I need the protection of the law from all injury. You are pleased to call my submission to the laws slavery; I, on the contrary, look to it as my safety, and as the guarantee of that liberty which enables me to do good and to live happy and at peace in society. I have never heard of laws which forbad me to live like an honest man. It is the wicked man only who recognises liberty but in the impunity of his crimes; I scorn such liberty, and bless the hand that deprives me of it. You call him a tyrant and a despot, I call him my King and my benefactor. The better I know how to conduct myself with respect to others, the more thankful I am to him who hinders others from behaving ill to me. The reader must pardon me these reflexions; I know they are superfluous to those who think; but may not this work fall into the hands of persons as credulous as the unhappy proselyte. In exposing the envenomed weapons of the Sect, let it not be said that I withhold the antidote. Should any be still blind enough not to perceive the tendency of all these sophisms of Illuminism, let them hearken to the Sect ardently declaring their hopes; the Hierophant continues: "Are we then fallen from our dignity so low as not even to feel our chains, or to hug them, and not cherish the flattering hope of being able to break them, or to recover our liberty, not by rebellion or violence (for the time is not yet come), but by force of reason. Because a thing cannot be accomplished to-morrow, should we despair of ever being able to effect it? Abandon such short-sighted men to their own reasonings and their own conclusions; they may conclude again and again; but nature will continue to act. Inexorable to all their interested remonstrances, she proceeds, and nothing can impede her majestic course. Some events may take place contrary to our wishes; but they will all rectify of themselves; inequalities will be levelled, and a lasting calm shall succeed the tempest. The only conclusion to be drawn from all these objections is, that we are too much accustomed to the present state of things, or perhaps self-interest has too great sway over us, to let us own that it is not impossible to attain universal independence-- [p. 483] [paragraph continues] Let then the laughers laugh and the scoffers scoff. He that observes and compares what Nature has done with what she does at present, will soon see, that in spite of all our intrigues she tends invariably toward her object. Her proceedings are imperceptible to him who reflects but little; they are visible only to the sage whose mind's eye penetrates even to the womb of time.--From the summit of the mount he discovers in the horizon that distant country, the very existence of which is not surmised by the servile multitude of the plain." The principal means which Weishaupt. offers to his adepts for the conquest of this land of promise, this soil of independence, are, to diminish the wants of the people, and to enlighten their minds. Hearken to his lessons, you who, heretofore protected by your laws, peaceably exercised an honourable and lucrative profession, and you who, once rivals of the flourishing commerce of Great Britain on the immensity of the ocean, are now but the sorrowful and dejected coasters of the Texel, imprudent disciples of a disorganizing Sect.--Learn, that it is in the secret hatred sworn against you by the Sect in its mysteries that you are to seek the destruction of Lyons, the pillage of Bourdeaux, the ruin of Nantes and Marseilles, the fate, in short, of so many other towns flourishing in commerce, even the fate of Amsterdam itself; and then let your aching eye glance on your trees of Equality and Liberty. At the very time when you thought that you were seconding the views of the Sect against the Nobles, Priests, and Monarchs, only to reinstate the people in their rights of Equality and Liberty, the Sect was aiming its blows at you as the grand artificers of Despotism. At that very period your profession was already proscribed by the mysteries, as that which of all others most surely tended to retain the people in slavery; the Illuminizing Jacobin was teaching his adepts, that "he who wishes to subject nations to his yoke, need but to create wants which he alone can satisfy.--Erect the mercantile tribe (die kaufmanschaft) into an hierarchical body; that is to say, confer on it some rank or some authority in the government, and you will have created the most formidable, the most despotic of all powers. You will see it giving laws to the universe, and on it alone will rest the independence of one part of the world and the slavery of the other. For that man dictates the law who has it in his power to create or foresee, to stifle, weaken, or satisfy want. And who are better enabled to do this than merchants?" Thus we see that those men who were such ardent supporters of Jacobinism in our commercial towns, with a view to partake of the government, are precisely those whose profession the profound Jacobin chiefly detests in every form of government. May the elucidation of this mystery inspire the industrious inhabitants of hospitable Britain with new zeal for their laws! The discovery of such a snare is of too great importance to their safety, to allow me to conceal it from them. In the next place the Hierophant proceeds from the art of diminishing wants in order to operate the independence of nations, to the duty of diffusing what he calls light. "He on the contrary (those are his words) "who wishes to render mankind free, teaches them how to refrain from the acquisition of [p. 484] things which they cannot afford: he enlightens them, he infuses into them boldness and inflexible manners. He that teaches them sobriety, temperance, and oeconomy, is more dangerous to the throne than the man who openly preaches regicide.--If you cannot diffuse at the same instant this degree of light among all men, at least begin by enlightening yourself, and by rendering yourself better. Serve, assist, and mutually support each other; augment our numbers; render yourselves at least independent, and leave to time and posterity the care of doing the rest. When your numbers shall be augmented to a certain degree, when you shall have acquired strength by your union, hesitate no longer, but begin to render yourself powerful and formidable to the wicked (that is to say to all who will resist their plans); the very circumstance of your being sufficiently numerous to talk of force, and that you really do talk of it, that circumstance alone makes the prophane and wicked tremble--That they may not be overpowered by numbers, many will become good (like you) of themselves, and will join your party.--You will soon acquire sufficient force to bind the hands of your opponents, to subjugate them and to stifle wickedness in the embryo." That is to say, as it may be understood in future, you will soon be able to stifle every principle of law, of government, of civil or political society, whose very institution in the eyes of an Illuminee is the germ of all the vices and misfortunes of human nature. "The mode of diffusing universal light, is not to proclaim it at once to the whole world, but to begin with yourself; then turn toward your next neighbour; you two can enlighten a third and fourth; let these in the same manner extend and multiply the number of the children of light, until numbers and force shall throw power into our hands." [*10] I observe in the ritual of this degree, that should the Hierophant be fatigued by the length of this discourse, he may take breath, and let one of the adepts continue the instruction of the proselyte. [*11] Our readers also may avail themselves of this permission, and they have copious matter for reflection in what they have hitherto read. They may perhaps be inclined to ask, to what degree the people must their wants not to stand in need of laws? They will perceive that bread itself must be denied them; for as long as fields are cultivated, laws will be necessary to protect the crops and to restrain men from reaping that which they have not sown; and if on the first view the Sophism appears wicked, the reader will soon perceive that it is but folly in the garb of Sophistry. The better to form their judgments on the lessons of the Hierophant, they will have to compare that Revolution, which is to be the effect of instruction alone, and which is insensibly to take place without the least shock or rebellion, with that period when the adepts shall have acquired numbers, force, and power, enabling them to bind the hands of their opponents, and to subjugate all who may still show any affection for their laws, or for that civil order in society which the Sect wishes to suppress. [p. 485] Footnotes ^484:1 Philo to Spartacus. Instructions for this degree. ^484:2 Instruction for this degree. ^485:3 [p. 485] Ibid. Further instructions on the admission to the degree of Priest. ^485:4 Ibid. Further instructions on the admission to the degree of Priest. ^485:5 Original Writings, Vol. II. Part 2. ^485:6 Last works of Philo and Spartacus, from Page 10 to 70, and certificates of Philo at the beginning of this degree. ^485:7 I have compared the two editions of this discourse. The first gives it just as Weishaupt composed and pronounced it at his first initiations. The second has been corrected by his adept the Baron Knigge, known by the characteristic of Philo. All the difference that I could observe was, a slight refinement of the style in some parts, while prolix passages had been added in others. I remarked, that the Compiler Knigge had literally copied all the impious, seditious, and frantic lessons of the original--I have given the preference to the original. In place of adding, I shall rather retrench, and only mention the most striking passages, making such reflexions as circumstances may require. Weishaupt, according to the idiom of the German language, always addressed the Candidate in the third person plural: in this particular, we have followed Knigge's correction, as more suitable with our language. ^485:8 Orig. Writ. Vol. II. Let 18, from Weishaupt to Zwack. ^485:9 Darum sind wilde, and im hochsten grad aufgeklarte, vieleicht, die einzige freye menschen. ^485:10 See Discourse on the lesser Mysteries of Illuminism. ^485:11 This Discourse actually requires at least two hours to read it. That part from which I have made extracts extends in Vol. II. of the Original Writings, from Page 44 to 93, and in the Last works of Philo and Spartacus, (which are in much smaller print) from Page 10 to 48. I mean to abridge the remaining part still more; but shall be scrupulously exact in the translation of all remarkable passages. Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford [1798], at sacred-texts.com [p. 486] CHAP. X. Continuation of the Discourse on the Lesser Mysteries IN that part of the discourse which remains to be laid before the reader, the Hierophant, insisting on the necessity of enlightening the people to operate the grand revolution, seems to fear that the Candidate has not clearly conceived the real plan of this revolution, which is in future to be the sole object of all his instructions. "Let your instructions and lights be diffused; so shall you render mutual security universal; and security and instruction will enable us to live without prince or government. If that were not the case, why should we go in quest of either?'' [*1] Here then the Candidate is clearly informed of the grand object towards which he is to direct all his future instructions. To teach the people to live without princes or governments, without laws or even civil society, is to be the general tendency of all his lessons. But of what nature must these lessons be to attain the desired object?--They are to treat of morality, and of morality alone. "For (continues the Hierophant) if light be the work of morality, light and security will gain strength as morality expands itself. Nor is true morality any other than the art of teaching men to shake off their wardship, to attain the age of manhood, and thus to need neither princes nor governments." [*2] When we shall see the Sect enthusiastically pronouncing the word morality, let us recollect the definition which it has just given us of it. Without it, we could not have understood the real sense of the terms honest men, virtue, good or wicked men. We see that, according to this definition, the honest man is he who labours at the overthrow of civil society, its laws, and its chiefs: for these are the only crimes or virtues mentioned in the whole Code. Presupposing that the Candidate may object that it would be impossible to bring mankind to adopt such doctrines, the Hierophant anticipates the objection, and exclaims, "He is little acquainted with the powers of reason and the attractions of virtue; he is a very novice in the regions of light, who shall harbour such mean ideas as to his own essence, or the nature of mankind. . . .If either he or I can attain this point, why should not another attain it also? What! when men can be led to despise the horrors of death, when they may be inflamed with the enthusiasm of religious and political follies, shall they be deaf to that very doctrine which can alone lead them to happiness? No, no; man is not so wicked [p. 487] as an arbitrary morality would make him appear. He is wicked, because Religion, the State, and bad example, perverts him. It would be of to those who wish to make him better, were there fewer persons whose interest it is to render him wicked in order that they may support their power by his wickedness." "Let us form a more liberal opinion of human nature. We will labour indefatigably, nor shall difficulties affright us. May our principles become the foundation of all morals! Let reason at length be the religion of men, and the problem is solved." [*3] This pressing exhortation will enable the reader to solve the problem of the altars, the worship, and the festivals of Reason, in the French Revolution; nor will they be any longer at a loss to know from what loathsome den their shameless Goddess rose. The Candidate also obtains the solution of all that may have appeared to him problematic in the course of his former trials. "Since such is the force of morality and of morality alone (says the Hierophant), since it alone can operate the grand revolution which is to restore liberty to mankind, and abolish the empire of imposture, superstition, and despotism; you must now perceive why on their first entrance into our Order we oblige our pupils to apply closely to the study of morality, to the knowledge of themselves and of others. You must see plainly, that if we permit each Novice to introduce his friend, it is in order to form a legion that may more justly he called holy and invincible than that of the Theban; since the battles of the friend fighting by the side of his friend are those which are to reinstate human nature in its rights, its liberty, and its primitive independence." "The morality which is to perform this miracle is not a morality of vain subtleties. It is not that morality which, degrading man, renders him careless of the goods of this world, forbids him the enjoyment of the innocent pleasures of life, and inspires him with the hatred of his neighbour. It must not be a morality favouring the interests only of its teachers, which prescribes persecution and intoleration, which militates against reason, which forbids the prudent use of the passions; whose virtues are no other than inaction, idleness, and the heaping of riches on the slothful.--Above all, it must not be that morality which, adding to the miseries of the miserable, throws them into a state of pusillanimity and despair, by the threats of hell and the fear of devils. "It must, on the contrary, be that morality so much disregarded and defaced at the present day by selfishness, and replete with heterogeneous principles. It must be a divine doctrine, such as Jesus taught to his disciples, and of which he gave the real interpretation in his secret conferences." This sudden transition naturally leads Weishaupt to the developement of a mystery of iniquity for which we have long since seen him preparing his Major Illuminees, and particularly the Scotch Knights of illuminization. The better to understand this mystery, let us recall to mind how the Insinuators or the teachers began by solemnly assuring their different Candidates, Novices, or Minerval Academicians, that in all the lodges of Illuminism there never arises [p. 488] a question in the least degree prejudicial to religion or the state. All these promises have been gradually lost sight of, and the proselyte has had time to accustom his ears to declamations against the priesthood and royalty. It has already been insinuated, that the Christianity of our times is very different from that taught by Jesus Christ; the time was not arrived for numbering Christ himself among the impostors; his name, his virtues, might still be venerated by certain adepts. Some there were, perhaps, who would be shocked at bare-faced Atheism; and it is on their account that Weishaupt has thus treated of Christ. In the preceding degree he had contented himself with hinting, that the doctrines of this divine teacher had been perverted; nor had he declared what species of political revolution was (as he pretended) pointed out in the Gospel. But here the execrable sophister apostrophizes the God of the Christians in language similar to that in which we have since seen the too famous Fauchet declaiming in the revolutionary pulpit. It is here that Weishaupt declares Jesus Christ to be the Father of the Jacobins, or rather (to speak the revolutionary language) the great Doctor of the Sans-culottes. But, to enable us the better to judge of the cunning and premeditated villainy of this detestable artifice, let us first attend to the correspondence of the adept who, under Weishaupt, is charged with the compiling of the Code. Knigge, like the monstrous prototype of Illuminism, subdivides the adepts into those who scoff at and detest revelation, and those who stand in need of a revealed religion to fix their ideas. It is to explain this that Knigge writes the following letter to Zwack: "To unite these two classes of men, to make them concur and co-operate toward our object, it was necessary to represent Christianity in such a light as to recall the superstitious to reason, and to teach our more enlightened sages not to reject it on account of its abuse. This should have been the secret of Masonry, and have led us to our object. Meanwhile despotism strengthens daily, though liberty universally keeps pace with it. It was necessary then to unite the extremes. We therefore assert here, that Christ did not establish a new religion, but that his intention was simply to reinstate natural religion in its rights; that by giving a general bond of union to the world, by diffusing the light and wisdom of his morality, and by dissipating prejudices, his intention was, to teach us the means of governing ourselves, and to re-establish, without the violent means of revolutions, the reign of Equality and Liberty among men. This was easily done by quoting certain texts from Scripture, and by giving explanations of them, true or false is of little consequence, provided each one finds a sense in these doctrines of Christ consonant with his reason. We add, that this religion, so simple in itself, was afterwards defaced; but that, by means of inviolable secrecy, it has been transmitted in purity to us through Freemasonry." "Spartacus (Weishaupt) had collected many materials for this, and I added my discoveries in the instructions for these two degrees. Our people, therefore, being convinced that we alone are possessed of the real secrets of Christianity, we have but to add a few words against the Clergy and Princes. In the last mysteries we have to unfold to our adepts this pious fraud, and then by writings demonstrate [p. 489] the origin of all religious impositions, and their mutual connexion with each other." [*4] If the reader be not too much disgusted with this pious fraud, but can still attend to the declamations of the Hierophant, let us once more enter that den of demons wherein presides the triple genius of impiety, hypocrisy, and anarchy. The Hierophant is about to say, "that their grand and ever-celebrated master, Jesus of Nazareth, appeared in an age when corruption was universal; in the midst of a people who from time immemorial had been subjected to, and severely felt the yoke of slavery; [*5] and who eagerly expected their deliverer announced by the Prophets. Jesus appeared and taught the doctrine of reason; to give greater efficacy to these doctrines, he formed them into a religion, and adopted the received traditions of the Jews. He prudently grafted his new school on their religion and their customs, which he made the vehicle of the essence and secrets of his new doctrines. He did not select sages for his new disciples, but ignorant men chosen from the lowest class of the people, to show that his doctrine was made for all, and suitable to every one's understanding; to show too, that the knowledge of the grand truths of reason was not a privilege peculiar to the great. He does not teach the Jews alone, but all mankind, the means of acquiring their liberty, by the observation of his precepts. He supported his doctrines by an innocent life, and sealed them with his blood." "His precepts for the salvation of the world are, simply, the love of God and the love of our neighbour; he asks no more. . . .Nobody ever reduced and consolidated the bonds of human society within their real limits as he did--No one was ever more intelligible to his hearers, or more prudently covered the sublime signification of his doctrine. No one, indeed, ever laid a surer foundation for liberty than our grand master, Jesus of Nazareth. It is true, that on all occasions (in ganzen) he carefully concealed the sublime meaning and natural consequences of his doctrines; for he had a secret doctrine, as is evident from more than one passage of the Gospel." It was during the time that he was writing this hypocritical history of the Messiah, that Weishaupt was turning the credulous proselyte into ridicule; as to the other adepts, he well knew that they anticipated such explanations, or at least would be delighted with them. Hence that impudence with which he falsifies the Scriptures. To prove the existence of this secret school, the doctrines of which are reserved for the initiated alone, he cites these words of Christ: "To you is given to know the mystery of the kingdom of God; but to them that are without, all things are done in parables." [*6] But he avoids mentioning the order which Christ gives to his disciples, "That which I tell you in the dark, speak ye in the light; and that which you hear in the ear, preach ye upon the house-tops." [*7] Weishaupt then proceeds to these words: "And their princes have power over them but it is not so among you; but whoever will be greater shall be your minister." [*8] This precept, as well as all those on Christian humility, he transforms into principles [p. 490] of disorganizing equality inimical to all constituted authorities.--With equal ease he avoids all those lessons so often repeated both by Christ and his Apostles, on the obligation of rendering to Caesar what is Caesar's, of paying tribute, and of recognizing the authority of God himself in that of the law and of the magistrates. If Christ has preached the love of our neighbour, or fraternal love, his words are immediately perverted by Weishaupt into a love of his Equality. If Christ exhorts his disciples to contemn riches, the impostor pretends it is to prepare the world for that community of riches which destroys all property. In fine, the conclusions drawn from these impious and deriding explanations, and from many others of a similar nature, are contained in the following words: "If therefore the object of the secret of Jesus, which has been preserved by the institution of the mysteries, and clearly demonstrated both by the conduct and the discourses of this divine master, was to reinstate mankind in their original Equality and Liberty, and to prepare the means; how many things immediately appear clear and natural, which hitherto seemed to be contradictory and unintelligible! This explains in what sense Christ was the saviour and the liberator of the world. Now the doctrine of original sin, of the fall of man, and of his regeneration, can be understood. The state of pure nature, of fallen or corrupt nature, and the state of grace, will no longer be a problem. Mankind, in quitting their state of original liberty, fell from the state of nature and lost their dignity. In their civil society, under their governments, they no longer live in the state of pure nature, but in that of fallen and corrupt nature. If the moderating of their passions and the diminution of their wants, reinstate them in their primitive dignity, that will really constitute their redemption and their state of grace. It is to this point that morality, and the most perfect of all morality, that of Jesus, leads mankind. When at length this doctrine shall be generalized throughout the world, the reign of the good and of the elect shall be established." [*9] This language is surely not enigmatical. The proselyte, once master of the mysteries it contains, needs only to be informed, how the great revolution, which they foretell, became the object of secret societies, and what advantages accrue to these societies from the secresy in which they exist. The Hierophant then, for the instruction of the proselyte, goes back to the origin of Masonry; he declares it to be the original school and depository of the true doctrine. He takes a view of its hieroglyphics, and shapes them to his system. The rough stone of Masonry becomes the symbol of the primitive state of man, savage but free.--The stone split or broken is the state of fallen nature, of mankind in civil society, no longer united in one family, but divided according to their states, governments, or religions. The polished stone represents mankind reinstated in its primitive dignity, in its independence. Yet Masonry has not only lost these explanations; but the illuminizing orator goes so far as to say, "The Freemasons, like Priests and chiefs of nations, have banished reason from the earth. They have inundated the world with tyrants, impostors, spectres, corpses, and men like to wild beasts." [p. 491] Should any reader be surprised at seeing the Hierophant give this account of Masonry, let him reflect on the hatred which Weishaupt had sworn against every school where the name of any deity was preserved. The Jehovah or the Grand Architect of Masonry, the two-fold God of the Rosycrusian magicians, still render the occult lodges a school of some sort of Theosophy. But how reserved soever the Hierophant may be with regard to Atheism, the proselyte must, nevertheless, foresee, that should he be admitted to one degree higher, neither the Grand Architect nor the two-fold God will meet a better fate than the God of the Christians. And therefore it is that Weishaupt declaims against those spirits, apparitions, and all the superstitions of Freemasonry; hence the theosophic Masons are involved in the general malediction pronounced against the priesthood and the throne. It can be easily conceived, that Weishaupt must represent true Masonry, or the pretended real Christianity, as solely extant in Illuminism. But the Hierophant enjoins the proselyte not to think that this is the only advantage which the Order and the whole universe draw from this mysterious association. Here let magistrates, the chiefs of nations, every man who still retains any regard for the support of laws and empires, and of civil society, let them, I say, read and meditate on these other advantages. The lesson is of the utmost importance--Whoever you are, all honest citizens, whether Masons, Rosycrusians, Mopses, Hewers of Wood, Knights; all you who thirst after the mysteries of the lodges, cease to accuse me of conjuring up chimerical dangers. I am not the man who speaks: it is he who of all others has been the best acquainted with your association, and has known what advantages could be drawn from them by able and patient conspirators.--Read; and tell us which is the most impressive on your mind, the pleasures you may find in your lodges, or the dangers of your country. Read; and if the name of citizen be still dear to you, reflect whether yours should remain inscribed on the registers of a secret society. You were ignorant of the dangers; the most monstrous of conspirators will lay them open to you, and he will call them advantages. He literally says, "Though these mysterious Associations should not attain our object, they prepare the way for us; they give a new interest to the cause; they present it under points of view hitherto unobserved; they stimulate the inventive powers and the expectations of mankind; they render men more indifferent as to the interests of governments; they bring men of divers nations and religions within the same bond of union; they deprive the church and the state of their ablest and most laborious members; they bring men together who would never otherwise have known or met each other. By this method alone they undermine the foundation of states, though they had really no such project in view. They throw them together and make them clash one against the other. They teach mankind the power and force of union; they point out to them the imperfection of their political constitutions, and that without exposing them to the suspicions of their enemies, such as magistrates and public governments. They mask our progress, and procure us the facility of incorporating in our plans and of admitting into our Order, after the proper trials, the most able men, whose patience, [p. 492] long abused, thirsts after the grand ultimatum. By this means they weaken the enemy; and though they should never triumph over him, they will at least diminish the numbers and the zeal of his partizans; they divide his troops to cover the attack. In proportion as these new associations or secret societies, formed in different states, shall acquire strength and prudence at the expence of the former ones (that is to say, of civil society), the latter must weaken, and insensibly fall." "Beside, our Society originates, and must naturally and essentially deduce its origin from those very governments whose vices have rendered our union necessary. We have no object but that better order of things for which we incessantly labour; all the efforts, therefore, of Princes to stop our progress will be fruitless; the spark may long remain hidden in the ashes, but the day must come in which shall burst forth the general flame. For nature nauseates always to run the same course. The heavier the yoke of oppression weighs on man, the more sedulously will he labour to throw it off; and the liberty he seeks shall expand itself. The seed is sown whence shall spring a new world; the roots extend themselves; they have acquired too much strength, they have been too industriously propagated, for the day of harvest to fail us.--Perhaps it may be necessary to wait thousands and thousands of years; but sooner or later nature shall consummate its grand work, and she shall restore that dignity to man for which he was destined from the beginning." Reader, you have heard them. These conspirators have said more than I should have dared to hint at on the nature and danger of these associations. It would be useless for me to rest longer on that point. I shall end by showing by what artifices the Hierophant endeavours to tranquilize the consciences of those adepts who may have been startled at these predictions. Notwithstanding all that he has said of those times when Illuminism shall find means of binding hands and subjugating; notwithstanding all that aversion against governments which he seeks to infuse into the adepts, he concludes in a hypocritical strain peculiar to his wickedness. "We are here at once the observers and the instruments of nature.--We do not wish to precipitate her steps. To enlighten men, to correct their morals, to inspire them with benevolence, such are our means. Secure of success, we abstain from violent commotions. To have foreseen the happiness of posterity, and to have prepared it by irreproachable means, suffices for our felicity. The tranquility of our consciences is not troubled by the reproach of aiming at the ruin or overthrow of states and thrones. Such an accusation could with no more propriety be preferred against us, than it might against the statesmen who had foreseen and foretold the impending and inevitable ruin of the state.--As assiduous observers of Nature, we admire her majestic course; and, burning with the noble pride of our origin, we felicitate ourselves on being the of men and of God." "But carefully observe and remember, that we do not impose our opinions; we do not oblige you to adopt our doctrines. Let the truth you can acknowledge be your only guide. Free man, exercise here thy primitive right; seek, doubt, examine; do you know of, or can you find elsewhere, any thing [p. 493] that is better?--Make us acquainted with your views, as we have exposed ours to you. We do not blush at the limits of our understandings; we know that we are but men; we know that such are the dispositions of nature, such the lot of man, that he is not to expect to attain perfection at his outset; he can attain it but by degrees. It is by gaining experience from our errors, by profiting of the lights acquired by our forefathers, that we shall become at once the children of wisdom, and the parents of a still wiser progeny. If, therefore, you think that you have found truth in the whole of our doctrine, adopt the whole. Should you perceive any error to have stolen in with it, remember that truth is not the less estimable on that account. If you have met with nothing that pleases you here, reject the whole without fear; and remember, that in many things, at least, we only need further research, or a new investigation. Do you observe any thing blameable or laudable, see and make choice of what you approve. Should you be more enlightened yourself, then your eye may have discovered truths which are still denied to us. The more art we employ in the instruction of our pupils to lead them to the paths of wisdom, the less you will be inclined to refuse us a portion of your applause." Thus ends the discourse of the Hierophant.--The proselyte who has heard it without shuddering, may flatter himself with being worthy of this priesthood. But before he is sacrilegiously anointed, he is led back to the porch, where he is invested with a white tunic. He wears a broad silken scarlet belt; the sleeve is tied at the extremity and middle with bandages of the same colour, which make it bulge out. [*10] I am particular in the description of this dress, because it was in a similar one that, during the French revolution, a comedian appeared personally attacking Almighty God, saying, "No! thou dost not exist. If thou hast power over the thunder bolts, grasp them; aim them at the man who dares set thee at defiance in the face of thy altars. But no, I blaspheme thee, and I still live. No, thou dost not exist." In the same costume, and to prepare him for the same blasphemies, the Epopt is recalled into the temple of mysteries. He is met by one of the Brethren, who does not permit him to advance till he has told him, "that he is sent to enquire whether he (the proselyte) has perfectly understood the discourse which has been read to him--whether he has any doubts concerning the doctrines which are contained in it--whether his heart is penetrated with the sanctity of the principles of the Order--whether he is sensible of the call, feels the strength of mind, the fervent will, and all the disinterestedness requisite to labour at the grand undertaking--whether he is ready to make a sacrifice of his will, and to suffer himself to be led by the most excellent superiors of the Order." I will spare the reader the disgusting impiety of the ceremonial which immediately follows.--The rites of the preceding degree were in derision of the Last Supper; these are an atrocious mimicry of the sacerdotal ordination. A curtain is drawn, and an altar appears with a crucifix upon it. On the altar also is a Bible; and the ritual of the Order lies on a reading desk; on the side a censer, and a phial full of oil. The Dean acts the part of a Bishop, and he is surrounded with acolytes. He prays over the proselyte, blesses him, cuts hair [p. 494] from the top of his head, clothes him in the vestments of the priesthood, and pronounces prayers after the fashion of the Sect. On presenting the cap he says, "Cover thyself with this cap, it is more valuable than the crown of kings." The very expressions of the Jacobin with his red cap. The communion consists in honey and milk, which the Dean gives to the proselyte, saying, "This is what Nature gives to man. Reflect how happy he would still have been, if the desire of superfluities had not, by depriving him of a taste for such simple food, multiplied his wants, and poisoned the balm of life." All the preceding part of this degree sufficiently explains the real meaning of these words. The ceremonies are terminated with delivering to the Epopt that part of the code which relates to his new degree. I shall relate all that is necessary for the reader to be informed of, when, after having treated of the degree of Regent, and of the Grand Mysteries, I shall come to investigate the government of the Order. Footnotes ^494:1 Und allgemeine aufklarung and sicherheit machen fursten and Staaten entbehrlich. Oder wo zu braucht man sie sodann. ^494:2 Die moral ist also die kunst welche menschen lehrt volljahrig zu werden, der vormundschaft los zu werden, in ihr mannliches alter zu tretten, and die fursten zu entbehren. ^494:3 Und endlich macht die vernunft zur religion der menschen, so ist die aufgabe aufgelosst. ^494:4 Orig. Writ. Vol. II. Letter from Philo to Cato, page 104, and following. ^494:5 Here is another example of the manner in which history is falsified--The Jews were enslaved from time immemorial! Does this nation then make its whole history consist in the years of its captivity? Had it forgot its liberty and its triumphs under Joshua, David, Solomon, and its other Kings? Was it just emerged from its captivity when it fell under the dominion of the Romans, a dominion under which it remained at the time of Christ's birth? The adept has heard talk of the captivity of the Jews, of those periods when Almighty God, as a punishment for their crimes, delivered them over to their enemies; and he inconsiderately concludes, that their whole history is but one continued scene of bondage. ^494:6 St. Mark, Ch. iv. V. 11. ^494:7 St. Matthew. Ch. x. V. 27. ^494:8 St. Mark, Ch. x. V. 42, 43. ^494:9 Orig. Writ. Part II. P. 106, 7. The last Works of Spartacus, P. 58.--The author has transcribed the whole of what is printed in Italics in German, lest his translation of this extraordinary should be suspected of being exaggerated. As he perfectly understands the German language, and is a man of undoubted veracity, I have omitted it, but in so doing think it my duty to mention it. TRANS. ^494:10 Last Works of Philo and Spartacus, at the end of the Discourse. Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford [1798], at sacred-texts.com [p. 495] CHAP. XI. Eighth Part of the Code of Illuminees--The Regent, or the Prince Illuminee. "WHEN one of our Epopts has sufficiently distinguished himself to bear a part in the political government of our Order; that is to say, when he unites prudence with the liberty of thinking and of acting; when he knows how to temper boldness with precaution, resolution with complaisance; subtlety with good nature; loyalty with simplicity; singularity with method; transcendency of wit with gravity and dignity of manners; when he has learned opportunely to speak or to be silent, how to obey or to command; when he shall have gained the esteem and affection of his fellow-citizens, though feared by them at the same time; when his heart shall be entirely devoted to the interests of our Order, and the common welfare of the universe shall be uppermost in his mind; then, and only then, let the Superior of the province propose him to the National Inspector as worthy of being admitted to the degree of Regent." Such are the qualities required by the Sect for the admission of its adepts to the degree which in the Code is sometimes termed Regent, at others the Prince Illuminee. Such are the very words to be found in the preamble of the rules of this degree. "Three things of the utmost consequence (says the Code) are to be observed. In the first place, the greatest reserve is necesssary with respect to this degree. Secondly, those who are admitted into it must be as much as possible free men and independent of all Princes: they must indeed have clearly manifested their hatred for the general constitution or the actual state of mankind; have shown how ardently they wish for a change in the government of the world; and how much the hints thrown out in the degree of Priest has inflamed their wishes for a better order of things." If all these requisites are to be found in the Candidate, then let the National Inspector once more examine, in his records, every thing relative to the conduct and character of the new adept, let him inspect the divers questions which have been put to him, and discover where he has shown his strong or his weak side. According to the result of this examination, let the Inspector propose some new questions on those articles on which the Candidate may have shown the greatest reserve. For example, some of the following: [*1] [p. 496] "I. Would you think a society objectionable, which should (till nature shall have ripened its grand revolutions) place itself in a situation, that would deprive Monarchs of the power of doing harm, though they should wish it; a society whose invisible means should prevent all governments from abusing their power? Would it be impossible, through the influence of such a society, to form a new state in each state, status in statu;" that is to say, would it be impossible to subject the rulers of every state to this Illuminizing Society, and to convert them into mere tools of the Order even in the government of their own dominions? "II. Were it to be objected, that such a society would abuse its power, would not the following considerations do away such an objection?--Do not our present rulers daily abuse their power? And are not the people silent, notwithstanding such an abuse? Is this power as secure from abuse in the hands of Princes, as it would be in those of our adepts whom we train up with so much care? If then any government could be harmless, would it not be our's, which would be entirely founded on morality, foresight, wisdom, liberty, and virtue?" "III. Though this universal government, founded on morality, should prove chimerical, would it not be worth while to make an essay of it?" "IV. Would not the most sceptical man find a sufficient guarantee against any abuse of power on the part of our Order, in the liberty of abandoning it at pleasure; in the happiness of having Superiors of tried merit, who, unknown to each other, could not possibly support each other in their treasonable combinations against the general welfare; Superiors, in short, who would be deterred from doing harm by the fear of the existing chiefs of empires?" "V. Should there exist any other secret means of guarding against the abuse of that authority entrusted by the order to our Superiors, what might they be?" "VI. Supposing despotism were to ensure, would it be dangerous in the hands of men who, from the very first step we made in the Order, teach us nothing but science, liberty, and virtue? Would not that despotism lose its sting, in the consideration that those chiefs who may have conceived dangerous plans will have begun by disposing a machine in direct opposition to their views." [*2] To understand the tendency of these questions, let us reflect on the meaning given by the Sect to liberty and general welfare. Above all, let us not forget the lesson already given to the adepts on morality; the art of teaching men to shake off the yoke of their minority, to set aside Princes and Rulers, and to learn to govern themselves. This lesson once well understood, the most contracted understanding must perceive, in spite of the insidious tenour of these questions, that their sole tendency is to ask, whether "a Sect would be very dangerous who, under pretence of hindering the chiefs of nations, Kings, Ministers, and Magistrates, from hurting the people, should begin by mastering the opinions of all those who surrounded Kings, Ministers, or Magistrates; or should seek by invisible means to captivate all the councils, and the agents of [p. 497] public authority, in order to reinstate mankind in the rights of their pretended majority; and to teach the subject to throw off the authority of his Prince, and learn to govern himself; or, in other words, to destroy every King, , Law, Magistrate, and public authority whatever?" The Candidate, too well-trained to the spirit of Illuminism not to see the real tendency of these questions, but also too much perverted by it to be startled at them, knows what answers he is to give to obtain the new degree. Should he still harbour doubts, the ceremonies of his installation would divest him of them. These are not theosophical or insignificant ceremonies;--every step demonstrates the disorganizing genius, and the hatred for all authority, which irritates the spleen of their impious author; and it is therefore that Weishaupt, when writing to Zwack, represents them as infinitely more important than those of the preceding degree. [*3] When the admission of the new adept is resolved on, he is informed, "that as in future he is to be entrusted with papers belonging to the Order, of far greater importance than any that he has yet had in his possession, it is necessary that the Order should have further securities. He is therefore to make his will, and insert a particular clause with respect to any private papers which he may leave in case of sudden death. He is to get a formal and juridical receipt of that part of his will from his family, or from the public Magistrate, and he is to take their promises in writing that they will fulfil his intentions." [*4] This precaution taken, and the day for the initiation fixed, the adept is admitted into an antichamber hung with black. Its furniture consists in a skeleton elevated on two steps, at the feet of which are laid a crown and a sword--There he is asked for the written dispositions he has made concerning the papers with which he may be entrusted, and the juridical promise he has received that his intentions shall be fulfilled. His hands are then loaded with chains, as if he were a slave; and he is thus left to his meditations. [*5] The Provincial who performs the functions of Initiator is alone in the first saloon, seated on a throne. The Introducer, having left the Candidate to his reflections, enters this room, and in a voice loud enough to be heard by the new adept, the following Dialogue takes place between them. "Provincial. Who brought this slave to us?" "Introducer. He came of his own accord; he knocked at the door." "Prov. What does he want?" "Introd. He is in search of Liberty, and asks to be freed from his chains." "Prov. Why does he not apply to those who have chained him?" "Introd. They refuse to break his bonds; they acquire too great an advantage from his slavery." "Prov. Who then is it that has reduced him to this state of slavery?" "Introd. Society, governments, the sciences, and false religion." Die geselschaft, der staat, die gelehrsamkeit, die falsche religion." "Prov. And he wishes to cast off this yoke to become a seditious man and a rebel?" [p. 498] "Introd. No; he wishes to unite with us, to join in our fights against the constitution of governments, the corruption of morals, and the profanation of religion. He wishes through our means to become powerful, that he may attain the grand ultimatum." "Prov. And who will answer to us, that after having obtained that power he will not also abuse it, that he will not be a tyrant and the author of new misfortunes?" "Introd. His heart and his reason are our guarantees--the Order has enlightened him. He has learned to conquer his passions and to know himself. Our Superiors have tried him." "Prov. That is saying a great deal--Is he also superior to prejudice. Does he prefer the general interest of the universe to that of more limited associations?" "Introd. Such have been his promises." "Prov. How many others have made similar promises who did not keep them? Is he master of himself? Can he resist temptation? Are personal considerations of no avail with respect to him? Ask him, whether the skeleton he has before him is that of a king, a nobleman, or a beggar?" "Introd. He cannot tell; nature has destroyed all that marked the depraved state of inequality; all that he sees is, that this skeleton was man like us; and the character of man is all that he attends to." "Prov. If such be his sentiments, let him be free at his own risk and peril. But he knows us not. Go and ask him why he implores our protection? [*6] This dialogue ended (and the reader will not be at a loss to perceive the drift of it), the Introducer returns to the Candidate, and says, `Brother, the knowledge you have acquired can no longer leave you in doubt as to the grandeur, the importance, the disinterestedness and lawfulness of our great object. It must therefore be indifferent to you whether you are acquainted with our Superiors or not; nevertheless, I have some information to impart to you on that subject." This information is nothing more than a summary of a pretended history of Masonry, going back to the deluge; and of what the Sect calls the fall of man, the loss of his dignity, and of the true doctrine. The story then continues to Noah and the few who escaped the deluge in the ark; these, he says, were a few Sages or Freemasons, who have maintained the true principles in their secret schools. It is for that reason, says the Instructor, that Masonry has preserved the denominations of Noachists and Patriarchs--Then comes a recapitulation of what had been said in the degree of Epopt on the pretended views of Christ, on the decline of Masonry, and on the honour reserved to Illuminism to preserve and revive these true and ancient mysteries--"When questioned (says the Instructor) as to whom we are indebted to for the actual constitution of our Order, and the present form of the inferior degrees, the following is the answer we give: "Our founders, without doubt, had extensive knowledge, since they have transmitted so much to us.--Actuated by a laudable zeal for the general [p. 499] welfare, they formed a code of laws for our Order; but, partly through prudence, and partly to guard against their own passions, they left the direction of the edifice they had raised to other hands, and retired. Their names will for ever remain in oblivion--The chiefs who govern the Order at present are not our founders; but posterity will doubly bless those unknown benefactors who have despised the vain glory of immortalizing their names. Every document which could have thrown light on our origin has been committed to the flames." "You will now be under the direction of other men; men who, gradually educated by the Order, have at length been placed at the helm. You will soon make one of their number--Tell me only, whether you still harbour any doubt as to the object of the Order." The Candidate, who has long since been past all possibility of doubt, advances with his Introducer toward another saloon; but, on opening the door, several of the adepts run and oppose their entrance. A new dialogue takes place in the style of the first--Who goes there? Who are you?--Is it a slave who fled from his masters--No slave shall enter here--He has fled that he might cease to be a slave; he craves an asylum and protection--But should his master follow?--He is safe, the doors are shut.--But should he be a traitor? He is not one, he has been educated under the eyes of the Illuminees. They have imprinted the divine seal on his forehead.--The door opens, and those who opposed the Candidate's entrance escort him to the third saloon. Here new obstacles occur, and another dialogue takes place between an adept in the inside and the Introducer. In the mean time the Provincial has left his former station, and has seated himself upon a throne in this third room. [It is worthy of remark that these enemies of thrones are themselves always seated on a throne.] The Provincial gives orders that the Candidate may be admitted, and desires to see whether he really bears the print of the seal of liberty. The Brethren accompany the new adept to the foot of the throne, "Prov. Wretch! You are a slave: and yet dare enter an assembly of free men! Do you know the fate that awaits you? You have passed through two doors to enter this; but you shall not go hence unpunished, if you prophane this sanctuary." "Introd. That will not happen; I will be his guarantee. You have taught him to thirst after liberty; and now keep your promise." "Prov. Well, Brother, we have subjected you to various trials. The elevation of your sentiments has made us conceive you to be both proper and worthy of being admitted into our Order. You have thrown yourself with confidence and without reserve into our arms: and it is time to impart to you that liberty which we have painted to you in such bewitching colours. We have been your guide during all the time that you stood in need of one. You are now strong enough to conduct yourself, be then in future your own guide, be it at your own peril and risk. Be free; that is to say, be a man, and a man who knows how to govern himself, a man who knows his duty, and his imprescriptible rights; a man who serves the universe alone; whose actions are solely directed to the general benefit of the world [p. 500] and of human . Every thing else is injustice--Be free and independent; in future be so of yourself.--Here, take back the engagements you have hitherto contracted with us. To you we return them all." As he pronounces these words, the returns him all the writings which concern him, such as his oaths, his promises, the minutes of his admission to the preceding degrees, the history of his life which he had transmitted to the Superiors, and all the notes taken by the Scrutators concerning him. This perhaps is one of the most delicate traits of policy of the Sect. The chiefs have had full leisure to pry into the most secret recesses of his , and the Scrutators have no further discoveries to make. The Candidate may take back his oaths and his secrets, but recollections (perhaps copies) still remain, and the Initiator may well continue: "In future you will owe us nothing but that which your heart shall dictate. We do not tyrannize over men, we only enlighten them. Have you found contentment, rest, satisfaction, happiness, among us? You will not then abandon us. Can we have mistaken you, or can you have mistaken us! It would be a misfortune for you; but you are free. Remember only that men free and independent do not offend each other; on the contrary, they assist and mutually protect each other. Remember, that to offend another man, is to give him the right of defending himself. Do you wish to make a noble use of the power we give to you? rely on our word: you shall find zeal and protection among us. Could a disinterested zeal for your brethren glow in your heart, then labour at the grand object, labour for unfortunate human nature, and thy last hour shall be blest. We ask nothing else from you, we ask nothing for ourselves. Question your own heart, and let it say whether our conduct to you has not been noble and disinterested. After so many favours, could you be ungrateful, your heart should avenge us, and chastise you. But no; many trials have proved you to be man of constancy and resolution. Be such your character, and in future govern with us oppressed man, and labour at rendering him virtuous and free." "Oh, Brother! what a fight, what hopes! when one day happiness, affection, and peace shall be the inhabitants of the earth! when misery, error, and oppression, shall disappear with superfluous wants! when, each one at his station labouring only for the general good, every father of a family shall be sovereign in his cot! when he that wishes to invade these sacred rights shall not find an asylum on the face of the earth! when idleness shall be no longer suffered! when the clod of useless sciences shall be cast aside, and none shall be taught but those which contribute to make man better, and to reinstate him in his primitive freedom, his future destiny! when we may flatter ourselves with having forwarded that happy period, and complacently view the fruits of our labours! when, in fine, each man viewing his brother in his fellow-creature, shall extend a succouring hand--with us and ours you shall find happiness and peace, should you continue faithful and attached to us. You will also remark, that the sign of this degree consists in extending your arms to a brother with your hands open, to show that they are not sullied by injustice [p. 501] and oppression, and the gripe is to seize the brother by the two elbows, as it were to hinder him from falling. The word is redemption." The foregoing so clearly demonstrate the meaning of this word redemption, that the reader must be surprised at learning that there still remain further mysteries to be revealed. The candidate is not yet admitted into the highest class. He is only the Prince Illuminee, and has to gain admission to the two degrees of Philosopher, and of the Man King. He is invested in his new principality by receiving a buckler, boots, a cloak, and a hat. The words pronounced at the investiture are worthy of the reader's attention. On presenting the , the Initiator says, "Arm thyself with fidelity, truth, and constancy; be a true Christian, and the shafts of calumny and misfortune shall not pierce thee." Be a Christian! (und sey ein Christ)!! What a strange Christian; what a wicked wretch then must be the Initiator who dares carry his dissimulation to such lengths, and prophane that sacred name in mysteries so evidently combined for the eradication of every trace of Christianity! But the adepts smiles, or his stupidity must be beyond expression if he does not see through so miserable a cant. On presenting the boots: "Be active in the service of the good, and fear no road which may lead to the propagation or discovery of happiness." This will recall to our minds the principle, whatever may be the means, fear not to employ them when they lead to what the Sect calls happiness. On giving the cloak: "Be a prince over thy people; that is to say, be sincere and wise, the benefactor of thy brethren, and teach them science." The reader will not be at a loss to understand what science. The formula of the hat is, "Beware of ever exchanging this hat of liberty (diesen frey heitshut) for a crown." Thus decorated, the Prince Illuminee receives the fraternal embrace.--He then hears read the instructions for his new degree; but as they entirely relate (like those of the preceding degree) to the government of the brethren, they will be treated of in the last part of the code. It is now time to proceed to the Grand Mysteries. Footnotes ^501:1 Instructions for conferring the degree of Regent, Nos. 1, 2, 3. Last works of Philo and Spartacus. ^501:2 Instructions for conferring the degree of Regent, Nos. 1, 2, 3. Last works of Philo and Spartacus. ^501:3 Original Writings, Vol. II. Letter 24, from Weishaupt to Cato. ^501:4 Instructions for conferring this degree, No. 5. ^501:5 Ritual of this degree, No. 1. ^501:6 Ritual of this degree, No. 1. Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford [1798], at sacred-texts.com [p. 502] CHAP. XII. Ninth Part of the Code of the Illuminees.--Class of Grand Mysteries; the Mage or the Philosopher, and the Man King. BY the great importance which the Sect places in the last mysteries of Illuminism, and the many precautions it has taken to conceal them from the public view, I am compelled to begin this chapter with candidly declaring, that every attempt to discover the original text of this part of the Code has been fruitless. Such an avowal, however, should not disconcert the reader. Though the real text may be wanting, we have abundant matter to supply its place. We have Weishaupt's familiar correspondence; we are in possession of the letters of many of the adepts who enthusiastically admired them; and the avowals are still extant of other adepts, who indignantly beheld such abominations. Our judgement will be guided by laws laid down by Weishaupt himself; and the famous apology of this monstrous legislator will teach us how to appreciate them. Such materials are more than sufficient to supply the deficiency of the literal text. It is true, that the crafty cant and affected enthusiasm of the Hierophant will be wanting; but the substance of his declamation, the extent and monstrosity of his ultimate plots will lose nothing of their evidence. Let us begin then by attending to their author, and from him receive our first impressions. Weishaupt, when writing to Zwack, his incomparable man, and speaking of the degree of Epopt, wherein impiety and rebellion seem to have strained every nerve to disseminate their venemous principles against church and state, says, "One might be tempted to think that this degree was the last and the most sublime: I have, nevertheless, THREE MORE of infinitely greater importance, which I reserve for our Grand Mysteries. But these I keep at home, and only show them to the Areopagites, or to a few other brethren the most distinguished for their merit and their services.--Were you here, I would admit you to my degree, for you are worthy of it--But I never suffer it to go out of my hands. It is of too serious an import; it is the key of the ancient and modern, the religious and political history of the universe." "That I may keep our provinces in due subordination, I will take care to have only three copies of this degree in all Germany; that is to say, one in each Inspection." He soon after writes again to the same adept: "I have [p. 503] composed four more degrees above that of Regent; and with respect to these four, even the lowest of them, our degree of Priest will be but child's play"--Wogegen den schlechesten der priester grad kinder spiel seyn soll. [*1] Before we draw any conclusion toward forming our judgment, let me recall to the mind of the reader those letters wherein Weishaupt declares, that every degree shall be an apprenticeship for the next, a sort of Noviciate for the higher degrees. That these degrees were always to be in crescendo; in fine, that in the last class of the mysteries a perfect statement of the maxims and polity of Illuminism was to be given. Und am ende folgt die totale einsicht in die politic and maximen des ordens. [*2] After such letters, the text of these mysteries is scarcely necessary. I know that these degrees were reduced to two for the last class of the mysteries; I know, from the agreement made by the founder and his intimate adepts, that the first was the Mage, or ; the other, the Man King. [*3] I will start from these data, and shall not hesitate to say, that this monster of impiety and of wickedness imposes on himself when he speaks of degrees infinitely more important for the higher mysteries, or when he pretends that those of Epopt and Regent are but puerile in comparison with those which he reserves for his intimate adepts. His execrable pride may flatter him with surpassing even the devils themselves, in his wicked inventions for sending forth the pestiferous blast; but their combined efforts could not suggest more hideous plots than those in which Weishaupt glories when calling them his lesser mysteries.--What! the vow of annihilating every idea of religion, even to the very name of a God; the plan for overthrowing every government, even to the obliteration of every vestige of laws, authority, or civil society; the wish of destroying our arts and sciences, our towns, and even villages, that they may realize their systems of Equality and Liberty; the desire of exterminating the greater part of human nature, to work the triumph of their vagabond clans, over the remaining part of mankind. These vows and wishes, these plots and plans, have already appeared in the lesser mysteries, and his adepts must have been as stupid as he wishes them to be impious and wicked, if they have not seen through the web that veils from their sight the baleful abyss. And, after all, it is not the object or the substance of their plots which is thus slightly veiled; the terms alone are concealed. There only remains to say, that all religion shall be destroyed for the adoption of Atheism; every constitution, whether Monarchical or Republican, shall be overthrown in favour of absolute Independence; property shall be annihilated; science and arts shall be suppressed; towns, houses, and fixed habitations, reduced to ashes, for the reestablishment of the roaming and savage life, which the hypocrite, in his cant, calls the patriarchal life. Such are the terms; and the scroll of this hideous pantomime needed only to be unrolled, to tell the names of those who were to appear on the gloomy stage of the last mysteries. The adept had long since inhaled the deleterious air with which Weishaupt had spared no pains to surround him; and could he nauseate this, or turn away from these disastrous machinations, the gates of the mysterious pit were shut against him. At such a sight nature shudders--The reader will cry out, None but monsters could [p. 504] have conceived or abetted such plots. Be it so; I will not contradict him; I only wish to name these monsters.--Behold Weishaupt and his profound adepts! The reader will find the proofs of this exclamation in their own writings. Weishaupt, who divided his mysteries into two classes, also distributed his last secrets under two heads. First, Religion; which was the object of the Mages: The other comprehended what he called his Polity; and he reserved it for the Man King. Let us separately investigate each of these degrees, commencing with that principle which he himself lays down, and from which he never deviates, that each degree shall be a preparatory concatenation of principles and doctrines, the ultimate tendency of which was to form the object of the last mysteries. Such a principle is more than sufficient to demonstrate that the secret to be imparted to his Mages can be no other than the most absolute Atheism, and the total subversion of every Religion. The adept, however, has already imbibed such horrid principles; and the secret consists in telling him, in plain terms, that it was toward that point the Sect had long since been leading him, and that in future all his thoughts, words, and actions, must tend to second the views of the Sect in their monstrous undertaking; that in the preceding degrees the name of Religion had only been preserved the better to destroy the thing; but that in future the very name would only be the expression of chimeras, of superstition, of fanaticism, supported by despotism and ambition, as a tool for enslaving mankind. This explication is no vain fancy of mine. See Weishaupt confidentially writing to his intimate and incomparable Cato-Zwack: "I firmly believe, that the secret doctrine of Christ had no other object in view than the re-establishment of Jewish Liberty, which is the explanation I give of it. I even believe, that Freemasonry is nothing but a Christianity of this sort; at least, my explanation of their Hieroglyphics perfectly coincides with such an explanation. In this sense, nobody could blush at being a Christian; for I preserve the name, and substitute reason,--denn ich lasse den namen, and substituiere ihm die vernunft."--He continues: "It is no trivial matter to have discovered a new Religion and a new Polity in these tenebrous ;" and he goes on to say, "One might be induced to think that this was my highest degree; I have, nevertheless, three of infinitely more importance, for our grand mysteries." [*4] Here then is Weishaupt's decision on the degree of Epopt or Illuminized Priest.--It is Christianity preserving the name of Religion, with the Gospel converted into a Code by means of which Christ taught the Jacobinical Equality and Liberty. [*5] Here Weishaupt is in his wickedness and his impiety; it is under the sacred name of Religion that he teaches his disorganizing principles of Equality and Liberty. After having led his Epopts to the pinnacle of Impiety, to what farther lengths can he possibly lead his Mage?--He may erase the names of Religion and God? And this he will do in his higher mysteries; for who can expect to find them when he says, "You know that the Unity of God was one of the secrets revealed in the mysteries of Eleusis; as for that, there is no fear of any such thing being found in mine." [*6] [p. 505] After this, can the name of God be expected ever to be found in the mysteries of the Illuminized Mage for any other purpose than to be blasphemed? We see this same Weishaupt reserving all the Atheistical productions for this degree; he writes again to his incomparable man: "With our beginners let us act prudently with respect to books on Religion and Polity. In my plan, I reserve them for the grand mysteries. At first we must put only books of history or of metaphysics into their hands. Let Morality be our pursuit. Robinet, Mirabeau (that is to say, the System of Nature written by Diderot, though attributed to Mirabeau), the Social System, Natural Polity, the Philosophy of Nature, and such works, are reserved for my higher degrees.--At present they must not even be mentioned to our adepts, and particularly Helvetius on Man." [*7] The reader here sees a list of the most Anti-religious and the most Atheistical works, [*8] and that they are reserved for these last mysteries. As a preparation for them (horribile dictu!) the very idea of a God must be eradicated from the mind of the adept. Can we doubt this, when we see Weishaupt thus write: "Do put Brother Numenius in correspondence with me; I must try to cure him of his Theosophical ideas, and properly prepare him for our views.--Ich will ihn suchen von der Theosophie zu curieren, and zu unseren absichten zu bestimmen." [*9] The Theosopher, or the man still believing in a God, is not fit for these mysteries; Religion then must, of course, be with them. Were the consequences less evident, and should we reject these secret correspondences, or condemn the last oracles of the Hierophant to remain within the hundred bolts which keeps them hidden from the adepts; I say, even then, to ascertain what the tenets of the Sect are as to any worship or religion, we should not be necessitated to enter that den of mysteries. Though Weishaupt had not mentioned Religion in his intimate correspondence, the Atheistical Conspiracy of his mysteries would be evident, and why seek private documents when he has given us irrefragable proofs of guilt in that which he publishes as his apology? Two years after his flight, Weishaupt most daringly asserts, that the Systems of his Illuminism (as published by the civil powers) are but a mere sketch, a plan as yet too ill-digested for the public to form any judgment either on him or his adepts, from the Original Writings or his Confidential Correspondence. He publishes a new Code, and calls it The corrected System of Illuminism, with its Degrees and Constitutions, by Adam Weishaupt, Counsellor to the Duke of Saxe Gotha. Here at least we have a right to judge him and his mysteries, both in his apology and his corrected degrees. But the reader will now view him in a new light. He is not only the conspiring infidel, but the insolent Sophister, insulting the Public with all the haughtiness of the most daring Atheist, shrugging his shoulders in disdain at the rest of mankind, and with impertinent pity saying to us all, as he did of the adepts whom he had duped, poor creatures! what could one not make you believe! I deign to cast my eyes on this apology, or the Illuminism corrected. He begins by telling us, that to have supposed him capable of composing so extensive a work in two years was doing him the honour of supposing him gifted [p. 506] with most extraordinary talents; and it is in such terms that the Sophister informs the public that he takes them for great fools. Let the contempt with which he treats his readers be retorted upon himself; let neither him nor his accomplices expect to descend to posterity with any other distinction than as the phenomena of vice and infamy. Are we to crouch in token of homage before the men who insolently scoff at their God and at the public weal? I know not whether Weishaupt needed extraordinary talents or not, though I grant him all the art and cunning of the Sophister; but most certainly he must have presumed much on the force of impudence when he flattered himself that the public would inevitably find that his corrected Code contained no principles but such as would elevate the mind and tend to form great men. [*10] What I find is, that it is nothing more than a medley of all the arts of his original Code for the education or rather depravation of his Adepts. Did I wish to form a stupid atheist, this would be the work I should chuse to put into his hands. As early as the third degree, in place of a God reigning as freely as he does powerfully over this universe, I find the universe transformed into a vast machine, in which every thing is held together or put in motion by I know not what fatality, decorated sometimes by the appellation of God, at other of nature. Again: did I wish to decorate with the name of providence a destiny which cannot annihilate a single atom without depriving the stars of their support and involving the whole universe in ruin, this would be the work I should recommend: I would give it to the narrow-minded adept, who, in a world where every thing is said to be necessary, should still pretend to talk of virtue or vices, or who could comfort himself for all the harm which the wicked could do him, by learning that the wicked like the virtuous man only followed the course which nature had traced for him; and that they would both arrive at the same point as himself In fine, I would put it into the hands of the imbecile, who would call the art of making merry the art of being always happy (ars semper gaudendi); the art of persuading oneself that one's misfortunes are incurable, or that they are all necessary. [*11] But what reader will brook the impudence of that conspiring infidel, who, dedicating his mysteries as an apology to the whole world and all mankind--der welt and den menschlichen geschlecht--and pretending to prove that his original mysteries are not a conspiracy against Religion, puts a discourse in the mouth of his new Hierophants, whose very title characterizes the most determined one both against God and Religion; he calls it, An Instruction for the adepts who are inclined to the fancy of believing in or of adoring a God! I know it may be also translated, An instruction for the Brethren inclining toward or Religious enthusiasm. [*12] But if both these translations be not in the language of the Sophisters, let the reader judge, from the exordium of the discourse, which is the most accurate. "He who wishes to labour for the happiness of mankind, to add to the content and rest of the human species, to decrease their dissatisfaction (these are literally the words of our Antitheosophical Sophister), must scrutinize and weaken those principles which trouble their rest, contentment, and happiness. Of this species are all those systems which are hostile to the ennobling and [p. 507] perfecting of human nature; which unnecessarily multiply evil in the world, or represent it as greater than it really is: all those systems which depreciate the merit and the dignity of man, which diminish his confidence in his own natural powers, and thereby render him lazy, pusillanimous, mean, and cringing: all those also which beget enthusiasm, which bring human reason into discredit, and thus open a free course for imposture: All the Theosophical and Mystical Systems; all those which have a direct or indirect tendency to such Systems; in short, all the principles derived from Theosophy, which, concealed in our hearts, often finish by leading men back to it, belong to this class." In the course of his instructions, the reader is not to expect that Weishaupt will make any exception in favour of the revealed Religion, not even a hint at such an exception is to be seen.--The Religion of Christ is represented as a medley of the reveries of Pythagoras, of Plato, and of Judaism. It is in vain for the Israelites to believe in the Unity of God, in the coming of a Messiah; it is in vain to assert that such was the faith of their forefathers, of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, long before they entered Egypt or Babylon; it is in vain to prove, that the adoration of the golden Calf, or of the god Apis, was punished by the Almighty as a prevarication of their Religion: Nothing will serve the Sophister; he will declare in his corrected Code, that the Religion of the Jews was but a modification of the reveries of the Egyptians, of Zoroaster, or of the Babylonians. To correct his adepts, he teaches them to cast aside the Creation as a chimera unknown to antiquity, and to reduce all Religion to two Systems--The one, that of matter co-eternal with God, a part of God, proceeding from God, cast forth and separated from God, in order to become the world--The other, matter co-eternal with God, without being God, but worked by God, for the formation of the universe. On these foundations he builds a general history of all Religions, and makes all appear equally absurd. The reader might be tempted to think that these lessons had been composed before the hegira or rather proscription of the author of Illuminism. They may have been compiled for one of those discourses which he declares to be of more importance than that of the Hierophant in the degree of Epopt.--He precisely follows the course which Knigge represents as the grand object of the last mysteries. He makes, after his fashion, a general compilation of all the schools of Philosophism and of its Systems; and hence he deduces Christianity and all Religions. The result of the whole is, that all Religions are founded on imposture and chimera, all end in rendering man cowardly, lazy, cringing, and superstitious; all degrade him, and trouble his repose. [*13] And it is thus that this Sophister, under pretence of his justification, daringly acts that part in public which before he had only ventured to act under the cover of his mysteries. He sallies forth from his baleful abyss but to proclaim to the world what heretofore he had only hinted to his adepts in private,--that the time was at length come for the overthrow of every Altar, and the annihilation of every Religion. Are any further proofs necessary to demonstrate the object of the grand mysteries? The testimony of Knigge cannot be objected to, nor can Knigge pretend or wish to mislead Zwack when confidentially corresponding with [p. 508] him. Both had signed the agreement of the Areopagites respecting the compilation of the degrees of Illuminism. [*14] Let us then attend to these two adepts--Philo-Knigge has been exhibiting all that he has done, according to Weishaupt's instructions, in the degree of Epopt, to demonstrate that Christ had no other view than the establishment of natural Religion, or, in the language of Illuminism, the rights of Equality and Liberty. Knigge then continues: "After having thus shown to our people that we are the real Christians, we have only a word to add against Priests and Princes. I have made use of such precaution in the degrees of Epopt and of Regent, that I should not be afraid of conferring them on Kings or Popes, provided they had undergone the proper previous trials. In our last mysteries we have to acknowledge this pious fraud; to prove, upon the testimony of authors, the origin of all the religious impostures, and to expose the whole with their connections and dependencies." [*15] Such, reader, is that word to add, which was to be spoken only in the last mysteries of Illuminism! That word against Priests and the Ministers of every worship! That word on the pious fraud, or rather labyrinth of impiety, in which the Sect had involved the Candidate on his first entrance into the Order, only to extricate him when he was judged worthy of their last mysteries! The adept must certainly be of weak intellects, and his credulity must border on stupidity, if he has not in the degree of Epopt, and long before, observed whither they were leading him. But should he really be still in the dark, or could he view with indignation the artifices which had been used with him; if all reflection have not abandoned him; what will not the very term of pious fraud discover to him? Will it not recall to his mind, "that on the first invitations of the Sect, to entice him into their Order, they began by telling him, that nothing contrary to Religion would ever enter the projects of the Order? Does he not remember, that this declaration was repeated on his admission into the noviciate, and reiterated when he was received into the minerval academy? Has he forgotten how strongly the sect enforced the study of morality and of virtue in the first degrees, and how carefully it isolated both from religion? When pouring forth its encomium on religion, did not the Sect insinuate, that true Religion widely differed from those mysteries and worship which had degenerated in the hands of the priesthood? Does he remember with what art and affected respect it spoke of Christ and his Gospel in the degrees of Major Illuminee, of Scotch Knight, and of Epopt; how the Gospel was insensibly metamorphosed into illuminized reason, its morality into that of Nature; and from a moral, reasonable, and natural religion, how a religion and a morality of the rights of man, of Equality and Liberty, were deduced? Does he reflect how all the different parts of this system and opinions of the Sect were insinuated to him, how naturally they occurred and appeared to have been fostered in his own breast? Could not the Sect say to him, 'tis true, we put you on the way, but you were much more earnest in solving our questions than we in answering yours. When, for example, we asked whether the religions which nations had adopted fulfilled the objects for which they were [p. 509] intended; whether the pure and simple religion of Christ was really that which different Sects professed at this present day, we knew what to believe, but we wished to know how far you had inhaled our principles. We had a multitude of prejudices to conquer in you, before we could succeed in persuading you that the pretended Religion of Christ was but an invention of Priestcraft, imposture, and tyranny. If such be the case with the much-admired and loudly proclaimed Gospel, what are we to think of all other religions? Learn, then, that they are all founded on fiction, all originate in imposition, error, imposture, and chimera. Such is our secret. All the windings we made; the hypotheses we assumed; the promises set forth; the panegyric pronounced on Christ and his secret schools; the fable, of Masonry being for a long time in possession of his true doctrines, and our Order being at present sole depositary of his mysteries, can no longer be subjects of surprise. If, to overturn Christianity and every Religion, we pretended solely to possess true Christianity, the true Religion, remember that the end sanctifies the means, that the sage must make use of all those means for good purposes, which the wicked do for evil. The means we have employed to rid you, and which we continue in order to rid mankind of all Religion, are but a pious fraud, which we always meant to reveal to you when admitted to the degree of Mage, or of Illuminized Philosopher!!!" To these reflections on the word to be added in the last mysteries (sufficiently demonstrated by the ascension of the degrees, by Weishaupt's apology, by his intimate correspondence, and that of his most perfect adepts) let us subjoin the avowal of a man little calculated indeed for a Member of such an abominable tribe, but who has better than any person known how to tear the mask from their hideous countenances, and expose their wickedness. I am acquainted with his real name; I am aware that it would greatly add to the confidence of the public; but I also know that could Illuminism discover his asylum, it would follow him to drink his blood, though it were to the southern pole. He is then entitled to secrecy; till now it has been observed, nor will I be the first to infringe his right. The Germans have paid him homage, and, ignorant of his name, they have surnamed him Biederman, or Man of Honour; at least, it is under that denomination that his works are generally cited. All that I can say in addition to what the public is already in possession of respecting this gentleman is that nothing could have induced him to continue so disgusting a course, but a zeal for the public welfare, and a just opinion, that the only means of preventing the effects of the conspiracy of the Sect was to make their machinations public.--Having passed through all the degrees, he was at length admitted to the last mysteries. He published those of Epopt or Priest, and of Regent, under the title of Last Works of Philo and Spartacus. He subjoined the instructions belonging to those degrees, with a Critical History of all the Degrees of Illuminism. Had I no other guarantee of the veracity of his assertions, than their glaring coincidence with the original writings, which is beyond all doubt with the attentive investigator, I should not hesitate in declaring him to be the man that has given the truest account, and was best [p. 510] acquainted with the Sect. The certificate at the head of the degree of Epopt and Regent, for a more perfect knowledge of which the public is indebted to him, I look upon as undoubtedly genuine. I know a person who has seen and read this certificate in the original, in Philo-Knigge's own hand-writing, and who has seen the seal of the Order attached to this certificate. I thus particularize because the public is entitled, in discussions of this importance, to know how far I have extended my researches, and how far the grounds I work upon deserve to be credited.--The passage I am about to quote is looked upon as fundamental by all German authors; it is from Biederman, and occurs near the end of his Critical History: "With respect to the two degrees of Mage and of Man King, there is no reception, that is to say, there are no ceremonies of initiation. Even the Elect are not permitted to transcribe these degrees, they only hear them read; and that is the reason why I do not publish them with this work." "The first is that of Mage, also called Philosopher. It contains the fundamental principles of Spinosism. Here every thing is material; God and the world are but one and the same thing; all religions are inconsistent, chimerical, and the invention of ambitious men." [*16] "Divers principles," continues the author, "thrown out in the preceding degrees might in some measure point out the object the Sect had in view." Certainly nothing could be better grounded than such a surmise--Nature, so often united with God, represented active like God, following with the same immensity of power, the same wisdom as God, the course which it had traced; a hundred such expressions in the mouth of the Hierophant evidently indicated, that the God of Weishaupt was that of Spinosa or Lucretius, no other than matter and the universe; in fine, the God of Atheism. Let the Sieur D'Alembert assert, that nothing can be more opposite to Atheism than Spinosism; [*17] or let Spinosa say, that, so far from being an Atheist, he converts every thing into God; will such an excuse raise pity or indignation in the reader? To deny that there is any other God than the world, is evidently denying the only being that can justly be called God. It is laughing at men, to wish to make them believe, that the person is preserved because they do not dare destroy the name, at the very time that the name of God is only used as an agent for the of every idea of a Deity. I think I have sufficiently demonstrated, that the first object of these grand mysteries of Illuminism, prepared with so much art and cunning, is no other than to plunge the adepts into a monstrous Atheism, to persuade all nations that religion is but an invention of ambitious impostors, and that to deliver nations from this despotism of imposture, and recover the famous rights of man, Equality and Liberty, they must begin by annihilating every religion, every worship, every altar, and cease to believe in a God. Let us continue the declaration of Biederman, and the object of the last part of the mysteries (or the degree of the Man king) will be equally clear. "The second degree of the grand mysteries," he says, "called the Man King, teaches that every inhabitant of the country or town, every father of a [p. 511] family, is sovereign, as men formerly were in the times of the patriarchal life, to which mankind is once more to be carried back; that, in consequence, all authority and all magistracy must be destroyed.--I have read these two degrees, and have passed through all those of the Order." [*18] How well authenticated soever this testimony may be, still one is loth to think that there could have existed men at once so absurd and so wicked as to take such exquisite pains to educate their adepts merely to address them in the end to the following purpose: "All that we have done for you hitherto was only to prepare you to co-operate with us in the annihilation of all Magistracy, all Governments, all Laws, and all Civil Society; of every Republic and even Democracy, as well as of every Aristocracy or Monarchy It all tended to infuse into you and make you insensibly imbibe that which we plainly tell you at present--All men are equal and free, this is their imprescriptible right; but it is not only under the dominion of Kings that you are deprived of the exercise of these rights. They are annulled wherever man recognises any other law than his own will. We have frequently spoken of Despotism and of Tyranny; but they are not confined to an Aristocracy or a Monarchy: Despotism and Tyranny as essentially reside in the Democratic sovereignty of the people, or in the legislative people, as in the legislative King. What right has that people to subject me and the minority to the decrees of its majority? Are such the rights of nature? Did the sovereign or legislative people exist any more than Kings or Aristocratic Legislators at that period when man enjoyed his natural Equality and Liberty?--Here then are our Mysteries--All that we have said to you of Tyrants and Despots, was only designed insensibly to lead you to what we had to impart concerning the despotism and tyranny of the people themselves. Democratic governments are not more consonant with nature than any others. If you ask, How it will be possible for men assembled in towns to live in future without laws, magistrates, or constituted authorities,--the answer is clear, Desert your towns and villages, and fire your houses. Did men build houses, villages, or towns in the days of the Patriarchs? They were all equal and free; the earth belonged to them all, each had an equal right, and lived where he chose. Their country was the world, and they were not confined to England or Spain, to France or Germany; their country was the whole earth, and not a Monarchy or petty Republic in some corner of it. Be equal and free, and you will be cosmopolites or citizens of the world. Could you but appreciate Equality and Liberty as you ought, you would view with indifference Rome, Vienna, Paris, London, or Constantinople in flames, or any of those towns, boroughs, or villages which you call your country. Friend and Brother, such is the grand secret which we reserved for our Mysteries!!!" It is painful indeed to believe, that stupidity, pride, and wickedness, should have thus combined to prepare adepts, who, attending Weishaupt's Mysteries, could mistake them for the Oracles of true wisdom and Philosophy. How many Jacobins and those pretended patriots of Democracy blush, when they learn the real object of the Sect which directs their [p. 512] actions; when they learn that they have only been the tools of a Sect whose ultimate object is to overturn even their Democratic Constitutions!--But in attributing such language to the Hierophant of the last Mysteries, what more have I said than the Illuminizing Legislator has already declared? What other can be the meaning of his Patriarchal or of his Nomade or roaming life, of those vagabond clans, or of man still in the savage state? [*19] What Democracy even could consist with the Patriarchal life or the vagabond clan? Where is the necessity for attending the last Mysteries, to learn from the Sect itself the extent of their conspiracies? We have seen Weishaupt cursing that day as one of the most disastrous for mankind, when, uniting themselves in civil society, they instituted Laws and Governments, and first formed nations and people. We have seen him depreciate nations and the national spirit as the grand source of Egoism; call down vengeance on the laws and the rights of nations as incompatible with the laws and rights of nature. What else can the Sect mean by saying, that nations shall disappear from the face of the earth, but the annihilation of all civil or national society? Why those blasphemies against the love of one's country, if not to persuade the adepts to none?--Have we not heard the Hierophant teaching that true morality consisted in the art of casting Princes and Governors aside and of governing oneself, that the real original sin in mankind was their uniting under the laws of civil society; that their redemption could be accomplished only by the abolition of this civil state? And when his frantic hatred against all government exalts his imagination, does he not enthusiastically exclaim, Let the laughers laugh, the scoffers scoff; still the day will come, when Princes and Nations shall disappear from the face of the earth; a time when each man shall recognize no other law but that of his reason? Nor does he hesitate to say, that this shall be the grand work of SECRET SOCIETIES. They are to reinstate man in his rights of Equality and Liberty, in an independence of every law but that of his reason. Such he formally declares to be one of the grand mysteries of his Illuminism; [*20] and can the reader quietly sit down and think that all these declarations of the author of Illuminism, who must be superior to his Mysteries, have not the absolute ruin of every law, government, and civil society, in view? Has he not seen the Sect anticipating those objections which evidence might have suggested against systems still more wicked than stupid; forewarning the adepts, that independence once more restored among men, it was not to meet the same fate it formerly had, and was never to be lost again;--teaching that mankind, having acquired wisdom by its disasters, will resemble a man corrected of his errors by long experience, and who carefully avoids those faults which were the cause of his past misfortunes? Has not the reader heard him proclaim to his elect, that this independence once recovered, the empire of the laws and all civil society would cease; and will he still continue to disbelieve the existence of the most deliberate and most dangerous Conspiracy that ever was formed society! Should any of my readers be weak enough to be seduced by the imaginary sweets of a patriarchal life, so artfully promised by Weishaupt, let [p. 513] them receive the explanation of that life from these pretended Apostles of Nature. At my outset I did not only declare, that the destruction of civil society was the object of their views; I did not confine myself to saying, that should Jacobinism triumph every Religion and every Government would be overthrown; but I added, that to whatever rank in society you may belong, your riches and your fields, your houses and your cottages, even your very wives and children would be torn from you. [*21] I also rejected fanaticism and enthusiasm in my own and my reader's name. I have said it, and adopting the simplest construction, do not proofs of the most extensive plots croud upon us from the very lessons of the Sect? Can common sense, nay can the strongest prejudice, refuse to admit such powerful evidence? Let him who may wish to preserve his field, his house, or the smallest part of his property, under this patriarchal life, go back to the lesser Mysteries; there let him hear the Hierophant teaching the adept, that it would have been happy for man, "Had he know how to preserve himself in the primitive state in which nature had placed him!--But soon the unhappy germ developed itself in his heart, and rest and happiness disappeared. As families multiplied, the necessary means of subsistence began to fail. The Nomade or roaming life ceased; Property began; Men chose fixed habitations; Agriculture brought them together." What were in the eyes of the Sect the dreadful consequences of this deviation from the Nomade or Patriarchal life?--Why the Hierophant hastens to tell us, Liberty was ruined in its foundations, and Equality disappeared. This Patriarchal or Nomade life is then no other than that which preceded property, the building of fixed habitations, of houses, cottages, or the cultivation of your fields. It was this beginning of property therefore, the building of habitations, the cultivation of lands, which struck the first mortal blow at Equality and Liberty. Should any one wish to return to the Patriarchal or Nomade life with such wretches as these apostles of Equality and Liberty, let him begin by renouncing his property; let him abandon his house and his field; let him, in unison with the Sect, declare, that the first blasphemy which was uttered against Equality and Liberty was by the man who first said my field, my house, my property. It must be voluntary blindness, indeed, in the man who will not see the hatred conceived and the Conspiracies entered into by the Sect against titles or pretensions to, nay against the very existence of property. It will acknowledge none, nor can it in any shape be compatible with their explanations of Equality and Liberty, or with that primitive state of nature which no more entitles you or me to the possession of this gold or silver, or that field, than it does a third person. Here it is not simply the question of establishing the Agrarian Laws, where lands, riches, and other properties are to be equally distributed among all; it is not simply to abolish the distinction of rich and poor; no, every property is to be destroyed, that of the poor like that of the rich. The first man who was weary of the Nomade, roaming, vagabond, and savage life, built a cot and not a palace. The first who furrowed the earth was in quest of bread and not of [p. 514] gold; but he nevertheless, according to the principles of the Sect, was the man who struck the first deadly blow at Equality and Liberty. Poor or rich man then, according to the doctrine of the Sect, the field you have recovered from the waste, and that you have cultivated, belongs to me equally as to you, or else to nobody; I, though idle, and inactive, am entitled to the fruit of your labours; I have a right to share those fruits which you have raised on the land which I left uncultured. Does not Equality disappear, whether it be a poor or rich man who shall pretend to be entitled to or say this field is mind, I have that property? If the poor man has a title to his property, has not the rich man also one? Treasures and palaces are no more property than the cot or cottage. Here an Illuminee spies want, there abundance; Equality and Liberty are every where banished; Despotism or Slavery is universal. Nevertheless, Equality and Liberty in his eyes are the rights of Nature, and he beholds them mortally wounded on the first appearance of property, when man became stationary. Poor or rich, you all imbrued your hands in this foul assassination of Equality and Liberty when you pretended to property; from that instant you are both involved in the curse pronounced in the mysteries; you are both objects of the Conspiracies of the Sect from the first instant that you dared assert your right to your habitations whether cots or palaces, to your properties whether fields or domains. But these cannot be the whole of the secrets; they are only those of the lesser mysteries. Weishaupt has revealed them to his Epopts; he reserves the grander secrets for his Mage and Man-King; then let any man rich or poor harbour, if he can, a hope of seeing the Sect respect his property. Or rather, let him behold the Sect at present pillaging the rich in favour of the poor. The last mysteries or ultimate conspiracy will take place; and then the poor man will learn, that if Illuminism begins by pillaging the rich, it is only to teach him that he is no better entitled to his property than the rich man was, and that the time is near when he will also be pillaged and fall a victim to the curse which has been pronounced against every proprietor. The progress of this Sophism is worthy of remark. If we judge by its present growth, what a gigantic form will it assume for posterity! The Genevese Sophister of Equality and Liberty, anticipating the modern Spartacus, had already dogmatically asserted, "That the man who, having enclosed a piece of ground, first took upon himself to say this is mine, and found beings simple enough to believe him, was the true founder of civil society." He then continues:--"What crimes, what wars, what murders, what miseries, what horrors would that man have spared mankind, who, tearing down the fences or filling up the ditches of this new enclosure, had called out to his equals, beware of hearkening to this impostor, you are ruined if ever you forget that the fruits belong to all, though the land belongs to none." [*22] How many crimes and spoliations would Rousseau have spared the French Revolution, if, contemning so disastrous a paradox, he had said with more judgement and veracity, "The first man who enclosed a piece of land and took upon himself to say, this belongs to nobody, I will cultivate it, and from sterile it shall become fertile; I will follow the course which nature shall point out to me, to raise sustenance for [p. 515] me, my wife and children, and this land will become my property. The God of nature, who as yet has given it to nobody, offers and will give it to him who shall first cultivate it in reward for his labour.--The first man who held such language, seconding the views of nature, and meeting with beings wise enough to imitate him, was the true benefactor of mankind. He taught his children and his equals, that they were not made to dispute the wild fruits of the earth one with another, nor with the savage beasts of the forest; no, he taught them, that there existed social and domestic virtues far preferable to the roaming and often ferocious life of the Nomades. His posterity was blessed, his generations were multiplied. If it was not in his power to avert all the evils, he at least destroyed the first of them, that sterility which stinted the very growth of life and drove the scanty population of the earth into the forests like wild beasts, and too often assimilated them to the lion or the tyger, to whom they frequently fell a prey. Had the Sophister of Geneva held this language, he would not have exposed himself to the ignominy of being the precursor of Weishaupt.--But human imbecility has lavished its praises on this paradox, and have decorated it with the name of Philosophy! The Bavarian Sophister adopts the doctrine of Rousseau, and the delirium of pride has only refined on the phrenzy of wickedness. That which in the mouth of the master had been but a paradox in support of the wildest independence, becomes in the scholar (without divesting itself of its folly) the blackest of conspiracies. It is now too late to say, that those were the wild chimeras of the Sophisters; at present we are compelled to say, such are the plots contriving against all and each one's property, plots which have been awfully illustrated by the spoliation of the Church, of the Nobility, of the Merchants, and of all rich proprietors Let them be called chimeras if you are so determined; but remember, that they are the chimeras of Weishaupt, of the genius of conspiring brigands, of a genius the most fertile in sophisms and artifice for the execution of those plans supposed to be chimerical. What Jean teaches his Sophisters, the modern Spartacus infuses into his Illuminized legions, The fruits belong to all, the land to none. He farther states in his dark recesses, When property began, Equality and Liberty disappeared; and it is in the name of this Equality and of this Liberty that he conspires, that he invites his conspirators to restore mankind to the Patriarchal or wandering life. Let not the reader be imposed upon by the term Patriarchal life. The illuminizing Hierophant speaks of Abraham and of the Patriarchs, of the father priest and king, sole sovereign over his family. He is not to expect to see the father surrounded by his children, exercising the sweetest of all dominions, and each child, docile to the dictates of nature, revering the orders and anticipating the will of a beloved father. No; this empire is as imaginary as his priesthood. We have seen in the degree of Mage, that the Patriarch can no more pretend to the acknowledgement of a God than can an Atheist. We must then begin by withdrawing from the Patriarchal life that interesting sight of the father offering up to heaven the prayers of his children, sacrificing in their [p. 516] name, and exercising in the midst of them the functions of the priest of the living God. In the next degree of the mysteries all his dominion over his children is to disappear, as his priesthood has already done. Nor was I afraid to assert in the beginning of this work, If Jacobinism triumphs--your very children shall be torn from you. I now repeat it; all this pretended sovereignty of the father is but a conspiracy against the paternal authority. The proofs are extant in the codes of the Sect. Here again is Weishaupt deprived of the glory of the invention. Rousseau and the Encyclopedists had long since told us, that the authority of the father ceased with the wants of the son; this was one of their principles of rebellion. The man who invented his Illuminism only to convert it into the common sewer of every antichristian and antisocial error, could not leave your children in the dark as to these lessons of independence, though under the sanctuary of the paternal roof; nor with respect to the pretended right of governing themselves, and of acknowledging no other law than that of their reason, as soon as they were strong enough to disobey, or no longer needed your assistance. Tell the illuminizing Hierophant, that your children belong to you; it will be useless, for he has already answered, "The paternal authority ceases with the wants of the children; the father would wrong his children, should he pretend to any authority over them after that period." This is but a principle laid down in the lesser mysteries. Follow up the consequences, or rather leave it to the revolution to develope such a principle. The reader will soon see to what this authority of the father is reduced. Scarcely can the child lisp the words Equality and Liberty, or that of Reason, when the commands of his parents become the most horrid despotism, oppression, and tyranny.--Nor is the Patriarchal sovereign to expect any more affection than obedience from his subjects or his children. In imparting the doctrines of Equality and Liberty, the Hierophant had taught them to blaspheme the love of one's family even still more than the national love, or the love of one's country, as being the more direct and immediate principle of the most disastrous Egoism. Let the father then enquire by what bonds his children still remain united to him, or how they are subjected to him, when, without fear, they may openly resist his Patriarchal power as soon as their feeble arms have acquired sufficient strength to gather the fruits which were to serve them as food. No, this hellish Sect acknowledges no ties. All those of nature, as well as those of government or religion, were to be dissolved in Weishaupt's last mysteries. The child, like the savage tyger of the forest, was to abandon his parents when strong enough to go alone in quest of his prey. And this is what the Sect calls restoring man to his primitive state of nature, to the Patriarchal life, to those days when filial piety compensated for all the necessary laws of civil society. Yes, it is by the most abandoned depravation of all morals, by the extinction of the purest and justest sentiments of nature, that these conspirators consummate their last mysteries. In the name of Equality and Liberty, they abjure the love and authority of their country; in that name they curse the authority and love of their own family. [p. 517] As I proceed in revealing these plots, I know not whether the reader does not frequently ask himself, What then can these men want? Have they not fortunes to preserve in our state of society? Have they not children in their families? Can they be conspiring against themselves? or, are they ignorant that their conspiracies will fall back upon themselves?--Those who can propose such questions are little acquainted with the enthusiasm of error when inflated by the spirit of independence and pride, of impiety and jealousy. They have not, like us, heard the cant of the heroes, demi-heroes, and sans-culottes of the revolution--They will be equal and free; they will it above all things.--It must cost them many sacrifices, but they are ready to make them--They will lose their fortunes in the pursuit, but you will not preserve yours--He that served will become the equal, nor will he recognize either God or man above him.--Have we not seen the prince of the fallen angels exclaiming in his pride, --Here at least We shall be free;-- Here we may reign secure, and in my choice To reign is worth ambition, tho' in hell: Better to reign in hell, than serve in heaven. It is not to one of adepts that the ties of nature are to be objects. He must be as heedless of the duty he owes to his parents as of the affection due to his children, or the baleful consequences of the mysteries cannot affect him. Can the reader have forgotten the precept laid down for the Insinuators or Recruiters?--The principles; look always to the principles, never to the consequences. Or, in other words, strenuously support and insist upon these great principles of Equality and Liberty; never be frightened or stopped by consequences, however disastrous they may appear. These wretches, blinded by their pride, do not know, then, that one single consequence proved to be false, contrary to nature, or hurtful to mankind, is a sufficient demonstration that both nature and truth hold the principle in detestation as the prime mover of these disasters. These madmen, with all the confidence of an atheistical Condorcet, when once become the adepts of Weishaupt, will exclaim even in the very tribune of the National Assembly, Perish the universe, but may the principle remain! They will not see, that this principle of Equality and Liberty, devastating human nature, cannot be an Equality and Liberty congenial to mankind. These unhappy men fall victims, perishing under the axe of these disorganizing principles, and spend their last breath in crying, Equality and liberty for ever. No; they are all ignorant of the power of error stimulated by pride, who could think of counteracting the plots of the Sect by the cries of nature, or even by the self-interest of the illuminized adept.--They have not sufficiently comprehended the artifice with which the Hierophant insinuates, vivifies, and inflames the enthusiastic zeal of his adepts. The reader may rest assured, that villany never slumbers; it watches incessantly the opportunity for the completion of its views. It will persuade the imbecile adept, that all his wants are to disappear on the establishment of the [p. 518] reign of Equality and Liberty; that he will be as free from wants as the savage; that Nature shall provide for them; and this heedless adept thirsts after such an Equality. If the adept ruffian be taught that the fruits belong to all, though the land to none, he will easily find means of obtaining his share. But am I really thinking of reconciling the adepts with their plots? What is it to them whether you see any agreement between them or not? Villany, we all know, is replete with contradictions; but is it the less wicked on that account, or are its crimes less real? In vain would the reader object and say, What can these men want with their monstrous Equality, with their plots against our civil laws, our title to even the very name of property? Must we then, to please them, abandon our habitations; must we renounce all arts and sciences, and end with burning our cities, towns, and villages, to follow them in herds like the savage and Nomade clans?--Are half the inhabitants of the globe to be slaughtered, the better to scatter these roaming herds? What can be the object of those arts and sciences, and particularly of those Minerval academies of Illuminism? Can it be for the propagation of science, or the involving mankind again in the disasters of barbarism, that all this parade of science is made? Can these Illuminees resemble the Goths, Huns, or Vandals? And is Europe once more threatened with an inundation of barbarians like those which formerly sallied from the North? In answering such questions, the reader may expect that I would put certain restrictions on the views of the Sect. Nothing like a restriction or qualification. No; you must renounce all the arts, all the sciences; you must begin by firing your habitations, not only your cities, towns, and villages, in short all your fixed habitations, unless you stop the disorganizing career of the Sect. Yes, wherever its legions shall be at liberty to act and accomplish the grand object of the Sect, there you may expect to see those scenes of plunder, rapine, and devastation, which heretofore traced the awful progress of the Huns, Goths, or Vandals; and this inference is fairly drawn from the very Code of the Sect. Has not the reader heard the Hierophant insinuating the designs of the Sect upon the arts and sciences? Has he not taught the adept to answer, when asked what misfortunes reduced human nature to slavery, that it was civil society, the state, governments, and sciences? Has he not heard him exclaim, When shall the day come when, the clod of useless sciences banished form the earth, man shall recognize no other but the savage or nomade state, and which the Sect styles patriarchal, primitive, natural? Has he not declared, that the happiness and glory of the Sect would be at its zenith when, beholding those happy days, it could say, This is our work? (Wenn die beschleunigung dieser periode, unser werk ist?) [*23] Are we to be duped by the name of Minerval Academies, with which the Sect decorates its schools? Can we observe there any other study than that of applying the sciences to the subversion of science, as well as to the total annihilation of all religion or society, when we remark the anxiety with which the Sect puts the following questions to the adept on his coming out of these academies, wishing to know what progress he has made in its principles before he is admitted to the illuminized priesthood: [p. 519] "Do the general and common sciences to which men apply infuse real light? Do they lead to true happiness? Are they not rather the offspring of variegated wants, or of the anti-natural state in which men exist? Are they not the invention of crazy brains laboriously subtle?" [*24] The reader has heard these questions, he has heard the Sect blaspheme science, and will he still believe that Illuminism recognizes any other sciences but those of the man-savage equal and free, roaming in the forests? Have not the revolutionary devastations, the multitude of monuments fallen beneath the hatchet of the Jacobin brigand, already demonstrated the frantic hatred of the modern Vandals? But the mysteries elucidate this enigma in a clearer manner. Reader, give vent to your indignation. Ask again, What can this Weishaupt be? What are these adepts of Illuminism? Treat them as barbarians, as Huns, as Ostrogoths; but see him smiling at your contempt, and teaching his adepts to honour themselves by imitating, and glory in the hope of hereafter surpassing, the disastrous devastations of those barbarians.--Do you know in what light the illuminizing legislator views these northern clans sallying from their forests and desolating the most flourishing countries of Europe, firing its towns, beating down its empires, and strewing the earth with ruins? He complacently beholds the precious remains of the patriarchal race, the true offspring of Nature; it is with their hatchets that he means to regenerate mankind, and shape them out to the views of the Sect. I did not note the lessons of the Hierophant on this subject, when lecturing the future Epopt.--Hear the account which Weishaupt gives of these clans, when he pretends to historify human nature, at that epoch marked in the annals of Europe as a scourge, and called the inundation of the barbarians. Here is his description: At that period when all Europe had fallen prey to corruption, "Nature, which had preserved the true race of men in its original vigour and purity, came to the assistance of mankind. From distant, but poor and sterile countries, she calls those savage nations and sends them into the regions of luxury and voluptuousness to infuse new life into the enervated species of the south; and with new laws and morals to restore that vigour to human nature which flourished until an ill-extinguished germ of corruption infected even that portion of mankind which originally arrived in so pure a state," or those barbarians the pretended regenerators of Europe sent by Nature. Such are the encomiums lavished by the Sect on the Goths and Vandals. You thought it would be offending this illuminized tribe to compare them to barbarians; whereas they glory in the comparison. History has described these northern clans as carrying every where fire and sword, as ravaging countries, firing towns, destroying the monuments of the arts, depopulating empires; their course is to be traced by ruins and wastes, and in their train appear ignorance and the iron age. But in the eyes of the adept this is not the exceptionable part of their conduct; on the contrary, it was by such means that they were to regenerate mankind, and second the grand object of nature. These barbarians leave the regeneration in an imperfect state; in time they [p. 520] adopt our usages and manners; they are civilized; the plains rise once more in fertile crops; society is re-established; science returns; the arts flourish under the protection of the laws; towns are re-peopled; the savage and primitive race, confounded among the citizens, is subjected to the same laws, and governments acquire their pristine lustre. Here, in the eyes of the adept, is the grand crime of these barbarians; the Hierophant, deploring their fall, exclaims, "Oh had there remained any sages among them, happy enough to have preserved themselves from the contagion, how would they sigh after, and ardently wish to return to the former abodes of their ancestors, there again to enjoy their former pleasures on the banks of a rivulet, under the shade of a tree laden with fruit, by the side of the object of their affections! It was then that they conceived the high value of Liberty, and the greatness of the fault they had committed in placing too much power in the hands one man--It was then that the want of Liberty made them sensible of their fall, and seek means of softening the rigour of Slavery;--but even then their were only aimed against the tyrant, and not against tyranny." It is thus that the insidious and declaiming Sophister, but able Conspirator, leads the adept through the labyrinth of his lesser mysteries, not barely to imitate these barbarians, but to surpass their devouring rage, by constancy, perseverance, and the perpetuation of their devastations. Thus are to be explained all those questions on the danger of reconquering Equality and Liberty only to lose them again. Hence those exhortations "to unite and support each other; to increase their numbers; and to begin by becoming powerful and terrible--You have already done it, for the multitude sides with you--The wicked, who fear you, seek protection beneath your banners--Henceforward your strength will be sufficient to bind the remainder of mankind, subjugate them, and stifle vice in its origin." [*25] Such will be the explanation of the revolutionary rage and madness which has levelled beneath its blows such a multitude of majestic and invaluable monuments of the arts and sciences--The cry of indignation rising from every class suspends for a moment the sanguinary crimes of the Jacobin Vandal, and he even pretends to weep.--Wait, and the last mysteries shall be accomplished; wait, and you shall see the awful bodings of the Hierophant fulfilled, and with fire and sword shall he annihilate your laws, your sciences and arts, and erase your towns and habitations. Here in particular is to be found the origin of that revolutionary ferocity, that thirst of blood, those insatiable proscriptions, those incessant executions, and finally those banishments more artfully cruel than the relentless guillotine. Yes, the time draws near when they shall bind the hands, subjugate, and crush in their origin, what the Sect calls the wicked, or, in other words, all who are proof against their vile efforts; the time for subjugating and destroying every citizen zealous in the cause of Religion, or wishing to support the laws, civil society, or property. Like Huns and Vandals, the Sect has begun its career; but it will carefully avoid terminating it like them; the devastations of its followers [p. 521] shall be perpetuated, and they will be Vandals to the last, until Religion, property, and the laws shall be irrecoverably lost. Such atrocious plots are only the consequences of the lesser mysteries; but trust the author of the Sect, the modern Spartacus, for the farther developement of them. Has he not told you, that his last mysteries were but the consequences, a clearer and more absolute exposition of the foregoing secrets of the Order? He informed you, that nations, together with their laws and social institutions, shall vanish, and that they shall disappear before the all-powerful arm of his adepts, or his modern Vandals. What new secret then remains to be discovered, unless it be that no time shall blunt the sword or slack the unrelenting fury of his proselytes; that they shall persevere until the end of time in their Vandalism, lest Religion, society, science, arts, the love of their country, and respect for property, should shoot forth again, and overshadow the venemous growth of his Illuminized Equality and Liberty? But Spartacus is not to be contented with these last secrets of the Conspiracy; his pride cannot endure that others usurp the glory of the invention. Hitherto we have seen him play upon the credulity of his adepts, inflame their zeal, and acquire their respect by the pretended antiquity of his Order; and successively attribute the honour of instituting his mysteries to the children of the Patriarchs, the Sages, even to the god of Christianity, and to the founders of the Masonic Lodges. But now the time is come when the adept, initiated in the higher mysteries, is supposed to be sufficiently enthusiastic in his admiration of the Order for the chiefs no longer to fear to disclose the real history of Illuminism. [*26] Here they inform him, that this secret society, which so artfully led him from mystery to mystery, which has with such persevering industry rooted from his heart every principle of Religion, all false ideas of love of the country or affection for his family, all pretensions to property, to the exclusive right to riches, or to the fruits of the earth; this society, which took such pains to demonstrate the tyranny and despotism of all that he calls the laws of empires; this society, which has declared him free, and teaches him that he has no sovereign but himself, no rights to respect in others, but those of perfect Equality, of absolute Liberty, and of the most entire independence; this society is not the offspring of an ignorant and superstitious antiquity, it is that of modem philosophy; in a word, it is of our own invention. The true father of Illuminism is no other than SPARTACUS WEISHAUPT. We must also perceive by many of Weishaupt's letters, that this latter part of the secret, which attributed to him the whole honour of the invention, always remained a mystery to the greater part of his Mages and Men-Kings. Those alone who, under the title of Areopagites, formed the grand council of the Order, were to be made acquainted with the real chief and founder, except in certain cases where an adept was judged worthy of so distinguished a mark of confidence. [*27] Whatever merit the adept might boast, Weishaupt knew no higher recompence than to tell them in the end, "This general [p. 522] overthrow of the Altar, of the Throne, and of all Society, is a conception of my own; to me and to me alone is due the whole glory." I have revealed the disastrous secrets of Illuminism; I have laid open the gradation and progressive degrees, the long chain of artifice, by which the Sect prepares its adepts for the last mysteries, to behold them stript of their veil without shuddering, and to embrace them with enthusiastic ardour.--We must either commit the Code of the Sect to the flames, and deny the truth of its annals; even refuse the evidence of the familiar correspondence of Spartacus Weishaupt the founder, and of Philo-Knigge the principal compiler; we must dispute all the agreements of its most arduous co-operators, or else must we wait, as the only possible demonstration, the entire and fatal execution of these disastrous plots, before we positively pronounce, that the sole object of their infernal plans and of their frantic wishes is no other than the total overthrow of every Altar, of every Throne or Magistracy; the annihilation of all authority and of all civil or religious society; the destruction of property whether in the hands of the rich or of the poor; and the very arts and sciences which can only be cultivated in civil society are to be banished from the face of the earth. Equality and Liberty, together with the most absolute independence, are to be the substitutes for all rights and all property: Our morals and social intercourse are to make place for the savage, vagabond, roaming life, which the Sect alternately decorates with the name of Nomade and of Patriarchal. The means to be employed in operating this change will be found in the artifice, deceit, illusion and wickedness which the Sophisters are masters of, until the force of numbers shall have declared for the Sect; but when at length, powerful in numbers, the Sect shall have acquired strength, it shall not only bind hands, subjugate, murder, ravage, and renew all the horrors and atrocities of the barbarians of the North, but also surpass those Vandals in the arts of destruction, and without pity or distinction butcher all that part of mankind that shall dare to oppose the progress of the Sect, presume to heave a sigh over the ruins of religion, society, or property, or attempt to raise them from their ashes.--If I have not proved that such are the wishes, the secret machinations of the Sect and of its flagitious principles, let me be informed what is to be understood by proof, or what is to be the operation of evidence on the human mind.--Were it possible that any of my readers still consoled themselves with the idea that the frantic extravagance of these plots surpassed their wickedness, let them remember that I have still something more to say.--I have still to investigate the laws and interior government of the Sect, laws adopted for the destruction of every other law or government, and that it might hereafter prove, that however monstrous the object of the plots of the Sect may be, it was far from being chimerical. [p. 523] [p. 524] Footnotes ^524:1 Orig. Writ. Vol. II. Let. 15, 16, 24, to Cato-Zwack. ^524:2 Ibid. Vol. I. Let. 4, to Cato. ^524:3 Ibid. Vol. II. Let 1, to Philo, and Second Part of Agreement of the Areopagites. ^524:4 Original Writings, Vol. II. Let. 15, to Cato. ^524:5 See the Discourse on the Degree of Epopt. ^524:6 Original Writings, Vol. I. Let 4, to Cato. ^524:7 Ibid. Let 3, to Cato. ^524:8 See the Helvian Letters on these Works. ^524:9 Ibid. Vol. II. Let. 15, to Cato. ^524:10 So hoffe ich doch sollen alle darin ubereinkommen, dass die in diesen graden aufgestellten grund-saze fahig seyen, grosse und erhabene menschen zu bilden--Introduction to his corrected System. ^524:11 See in the corrected System the Discourse on the third class. ^524:12 Unterricht fur alle mitglieder, welche zu Theosophischen schwarmereyen geneight sind. ^524:13 See the last Discourse of Illuminism corrected. ^524:14 See this agreement in the Original Writings, Vol. II. Part II. signed the 20 Adarmeth 1551, or Anno Domini 20 December, 1781. ^524:15 Da nun die leute sehen dass wir die einzigen achten wahren Christen sind, so darfen wir da gegen ein word mehr gegen pfaffen and fursten reden; doch habe ich diess so gethan, dass ich papste und konige nach vorhergegangener prufung, in diese grade aufnehmen wollte. Indem hoheren mysterien sollte man dann A diese piam fraudem entdecken, und B aus allen schrifften den ursprung aller religiozen lugen, und deren zusammenhang entwickeln--Original Writings, Vol. II. Let. I., from Philo to Cato. ^524:16 Der erste, welcher Magus auch Philosophus heist, enthalt spinosistiche grund-satze, nach welchen alles materiell, Gotz und die welt einerley, alle religion unstatthaft, und eine erfindung hersuchtiger menschen ist. I might have quoted the testimony of another adept, who writes as follows to the authors of the Eu-demonia: (Vol. III. No. 2, Art. 4.) "I can also declare that I have been present at the grand mysteries; particularly, that in 1785 I was entrusted with the instructions of the degree of Mage or Philosopher, and that the short description given in the ENDLICHES SCHICKSAL (or the last object of Freemasonry) is perfectly exact and well grounded." The author of the Endliches Schicksal has only, like myself, copied the text from Biederman. I have no knowledge of this new adept. I see he has signed his letter, desiring the authors of the Eudemonia not to make use of his name without an absolute necessity. "Besides," he adds, "I am a Roman Catholic; and in the country in which I live might find disagreeable consequences from not having asked to be absolved from my oath, before I published what I had promised to keep secret." Sir, I am a Catholic as well as yourself, and should wish to know where you have learned, that the oath you had taken to the Illuminees was superior to that you had taken to the state. How then could you reconcile with your conscience the keeping back from the magistrate or the prince such proofs as you had acquired of a conspiracy against the state? Yes, do penance, and ask absolution for having taken such an oath, and for not having been true to the oath of allegiance which you had sworn to the state, and from which you could not be absolved by any power on earth.--What singular ideas are sometimes formed of probity! To persuade oneself that one is bound by an oath to a band of conspirators, while the oath of allegiance is overlooked!--Sir, you had said, that it was necessary to take proper precautions for your security, that wretches pretending to the power of life and death might not assassinate you, nothing could be more natural; take your precautions while informing the public magistrate, but do not come and give us as an excuse your fidelity to an oath, which in itself is nothing less than a perjury to the state. [p. 524] Notwithstanding, however, the reproach justly merited by this adept, his testimony is not to be neglected, since he has sent his name to the editors of the Eudemonia, a journal printed at Franckfort on the Mein, and highly deserving of encouragement for the vigour with which the editors combat the Illuminees. Their writings have frequently corroborated materials that I had received from Austria and Bavaria, which give me great confidence in the researches I have made. ^524:17 Panegyric of Montesquieu. ^524:18 Der zweyte, Rex gennant, lehrt dass jeder Bauer, Burger und hausvater ein souverain sey, wie in dem patriarchalischen leben, auf welches die leute wieder zuruck-gebracht werden musten, gewesen sey; und dass folglich alle obrigkeit wegfallen musse--Diese beyden graden habe auch ich, der ich in dem orden alles durchgegangen bin, selbst gelesen. Ibid. ^524:19 Original Writings, Vol. II. Let. 10, to Cato. ^524:20 See the Degree of Epopt. ^524:21 Chap. I. ^524:22 Discourse on the Inequality of Stations, Vol. II. ^524:23 See above, the Prince Illuminee. ^524:24 Befordem die gemeine wissenschaften warhafte aufklarung, wahre menschliche gluckseligkeit; oder sind sie viel mehr kinder der noth, der verfielfaltigten bedurfnisse, des wiedernaturlichen zustandes erfindungen spitzfindiger eitler kopfe? ^524:25 Nun seyd ihr stark genug den noch ubrigen rest die hande zu binden, sie zu unterwerfen, und die bosheit eher in ihrem keime zu ersticken. ^524:26 Original Writings, Vol. II. Letter from Knigge to Zwack. ^524:27 Original Writings, Vol. I. Let. 25, to Cato. Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford [1798], at sacred-texts.com [p. 525] CHAP. XIII. Tenth and Last Part of the Code of the Illuminees.--Government of the Order--General Idea of that Government, and of the Share which the Inferior Classes of Illuminism bear in it. IT is not enough for the founder of a Sect of Conspirators to have fixed the precise object of his plots, the trials and degrees through which his adepts are to rise insensibly to the acquisition of his profoundest mysteries. His accomplices must form but one body animated by one spirit; its members must be moved by the same laws, under the inspection and government of the same chiefs, and all must tend toward the same object. Such a genius as Weishaupt's could not be suspected of having overlooked in his Code so important a means of success. From what I have already said, the reader will have observed what connection and subordination subsisted in the gradation of his mysteries; how all the adepts of a given town formed, notwithstanding the inequality of their degrees, but one and the same academy of Conspirators, while each one laboured separately at the overthrow of religion and the laws in the state in which he lived. In this academy the Candidate and the Novice are under the direction of the Insinuator, who introduces them into the Minerval Lodges; these Lodges are governed by the Minor Illuminees, who in their turn are inspected by the Major Illuminees. Next to these preparatory degrees follow the intermediary or Masonic degree, called the Scotch Knight; and his power extends on the one side over the Major Illuminees, and on the other over the Illuminized Masons; or, in general, over all that part of the Order stiled in the Code the lower part of the edifice. After these we meet the Epopts and Regents or Princes of the lesser mysteries, and lastly, in the higher mysteries, the Mage and Man-King. The aggregate of all these degrees forms a complete academy of Conspirators, and impendent ruin threatens the country where such a one exists. The Magistrate and the Citizen may expect to see their property and their religion annihilated. The Sect recognizes no country but the universe, or rather acknowledges none; the very term country is a blasphemy against the rights of man, against Equality and Liberty. What each member in his particular academy performs by himself, is performed throughout all of them by the Sect in general, and the combined efforts of the whole are regularly directed toward the concerted plan of devastation. The Miners have received [p. 526] their instructions, that each may bore his subterraneous galleries, and lodge the chamber of his mines in such a manner that partial explosions may forward the views of the Sect, without endamaging the grand chamber, which shall involve the whole world in the premeditated explosion of universal destruction. To produce this , general laws and mutual communications, common chiefs and directors are requisite. Each Conspirator, wherever his field of action may lie, must be certain that he acts in concert with his Brethren, that he will not be crossed in his plans, but on the contrary meet every where with support and corresponding agents. Weishaupt was aware, that the farther the sphere of disorganization was to extend the more perfect should be the organization of his power. The more eager he was to call down universal anarchy, and make it take place of all laws, the more did he wish to establish subordination, and concentrate the forces of the Order, the better to direct its motions. To accomplish this, the oath of implicit obedience to Superiors was not enough. It was not sufficient for the adept to have blindly submitted his life and fortune to the despotic power of unknown chiefs, should they ever suspect him of treachery or rebellion. The Superiors themselves were to be bound by laws and principles common to all, that they might proceed in all points by a regular and uniform impulse. It cost Weishaupt much meditation before he could perfect his plan of government as he wished. Five years after the establishment of the Sect, he writes "This machine of ours must be so perfectly simple that a child could direct it;" and still later he writes, "allow me time to digest my speculations, that I may properly marshal our forces." [*1] So preoccupied was Weishaupt with his speculations on the government of the Sect, that all his letters written to his principal adepts are replete with his maxims and political councils. One must have heard or read them one's self to credit the deep-laid villany of his means and his infernal policy. Here is an example: In the same letter which I have quoted of the 15 Asphandar 1151 he gives two rules to be inserted among the instructions of the Areopagites--The one, to be on the reserve with Candidates from among the class of the rich, because that sort of men, proud, ignorant, averse to labour, and impatient of subordination, only seek admission to our mysteries in order to make them an object of ridicule and mockery; the other, not to take the smallest pains to prove, that Illuminism is in the sole possession of the true Masonry, because the best possible demonstration is to give none. Let Weishaupt himself explain a third law, which is to make a part of his political collection. "That we may be uncontrolled in our discourse, let our pupils remark, that the Superiors enjoy a great latitude in that respect; that we sometimes speak in one way, sometimes in another; that we often question with great assurance only to sound the opinions of our pupils, and to give them an opportunity of showing it by their answers. This subterfuge repairs many errors. Let us always say, that the end will discover which of our observations conveys our true sentiments.--Thus we may speak sometimes in one way, at others in a quite different one, that we may never be embarrassed, and that our real sentiments [p. 527] may always be impenetrable to our inferiors. Let this be also inserted in the instructions, etiam hoc inseratur instructioni. It would still have a better effect, if you gave in charge to our Major Illuminees to vary their conversation with their inferiors, for the above reasons, ex rationibus supra dictis." These insertions of Latin are from Weishaupt, who frequently makes use of that language in his letters. It is immediately after having given these principles of government to the Areopagites, the chief superiors of his Illuminism, that Weishaupt adds, "I entreat that the maxims which are so often to be found in my letters may not be lost. Collect them for the use of our Areopagites, as they are not always present in my mind. With time they might form an excellent political degree. Philo has long since been employed about it. Communicate also your private instructions to each other, which may in time grow into an uniform Code. Read them attentively, that they may become familiar to you. Though I know them well and practise them (und auch darnach handle) they would take me too much time to digest them systematically. These maxims once engraved in your mind, you will enter better into my plans, and you will proceed more to my mode of operation." [*2] Let the reader also profit of these instructions. They must bear evidence in my behalf while revealing all the monstrous artifices of the remaining part of the Illuminized Code. From these long meditated combinations, sprang forth that chain of laws which was to direct each Illuminee in all his . We first remark in this government, as a means of subordination, a general division of command, as well as of locality. Each department has a particular Lodge for its adepts; each Minerval Lodge has a Superior from among the preparatory class, under the inspection of the intermediary class. In the second place, we find the division into districts which contain several Lodges, all which as well as the Prefect are under the direction of the superior of the district whom the Order calls Dean. He is also subjected to the Provincial, who has the inspection and command over all the lodges and deanries of the province. Next in rank comes the National Superior, who has full powers over all within his nation, Provincials, Deans, Lodges, &c. &c. Then comes the supreme council of the Order, or the Areopagites, presided by the real General of Illuminism. The same hierarchy is preserved in their communications. The simple Illuminee corresponds with his immediate superior, the latter with his Dean, and thus gradually ascending to the National Superiors. These latter are in direct correspondence with the Areopagites; and they alone are acquainted with their residence. In this council there is always a member whose particular office is to receive and answer their letters, and to transmit orders, which gradually descend to the person or persons who are the objects of them. The Areopagites alone are entrusted with the name and residence of the General, excepting in cases which I have already noticed, where particular confidence or remarkable services have gained for an adept the signal honour of knowing and approaching the modern Spartacus. [p. 528] It is easy to perceive, from the very regulations of the first degrees, how voluminous this correspondence must be. Each brother, in the first place, as the natural Scrutator of his co-adepts and of the prophane, is bound to transmit at least one letter each month, with a statement of all the observations he has made, whether favourable or detrimental to the Order. He is also to give an account of the progress which himself and his brethren have made; of the orders he has received, and of their execution; and he is each month to inform his higher superiors whether he is pleased with the conduct of his immediate superior. Each brother Insinuator is to report the progress of his Candidates, and the prospect he has of adding to their number. Next, to swell the volume, come all the portraits of the adepts, the extracts of tablets or daily observations made on the friends or enemies of the Order: also the minutes of initiations, the characters and lives of the initiated, the returns made by the Lodges, those by the superiors, and an infinity of other articles which the Illuminee is bound to make known to his chiefs. All this occurs without noticing the numberless orders and instructions which are perpetually transmitting to the inferiors. Beside the secret language already explained, and of which the grand object was to render this correspondence unintelligible to the prophane, the Sect had secret means of transmitting their letters, lest they might be intercepted. The Order styles these letters relative to their illuminism Quibus Licet's (or to those who have a right). The origin of this appellation is the direction of these letters which consists of the two words Quibus Licet or simply the initials Q. L. When, therefore, we find in the Original Writings, that such an adept has been fined in such a month for having neglected his Q. L., it must be understood that he let such a month pass without writing to his superiors. [*3] When the letter contains secrets or complaints which the adept chooses to keep from the knowledge of his immediate superior, he adds to the direction Soli or Primo (to him alone, to the first); this letter will then be opened by the Provincial, the National Superior, or will reach the Areopagites, or General, according to the rank of the person from whom it comes. Next to these general means of graduated correspondence, come the meetings proper to each degree, and their respective powers. We have already seen, that those of the Minerval academy are regularly held twice a month. The Minor Illuminees, who are the magistrates of this degree, and the Major Illuminee, or the Scotch Knight, who presides in them, have no direct share in the government, farther than to inspect the studies and watch over the conduct of the young Minervals, and report to the lodges of the Major Illuminees. It is in that degree that the authority begins to extend beyond the limits of the assembly. It is to the Major Illuminees that all the tablets or instructions relative to the brethren of Minerva are sent. Here these statements are digested, and receive additions and notes, before they are forwarded to the assembly of the next superior degree. Here are judged and determined the promotions of the Novices, Minervals, and Minor Illuminees; and also all differences and contests which may arise in the inferior degrees, unless the importance of the debate be such as to require the interference of a higher tribunal. They are the guardians of the first tablets and reversal letters of the [p. 529] brethren.--As to what a Major Illuminee may have acquired either relative to other secret societies, or to employments or dignities which might be obtained for adepts, he is bound to report it to his lodge, which will note it, and inform the assembly of the Directing Illuminees or Scotch Knights. [*4] When treating of the intermediary degree of Scotch Knight, I gave an account of their particular functions, and especially their charge of superintending the Masonic Lodges. The part they act in the general government of the Order chiefly consists in hearing all the Quibus Licets of the preparatory classes read in their chapters, even those of the Novices which had already been opened by the officers of the Minerval school: the latter having only the power of deciding provisionally on these letters. The authority which the Scotch Knights exercise over this correspondence seems to give still more propriety to their denomination of intermediary degree. Their Quibus Licets are directly sent to the Provincial Lodge, which is composed entirely of adepts initiated in the mysteries of the Order. But the Knights read all letters coining from the preparatory class which have not the distinction of Primo or Soli. They classify and make extracts from all the Quibus Licets of lesser importance coming from the inferior degrees, and send the general extract to the Provincial. To these extracts they subjoin a circumstantial account of every thing that is going forward in the lodges of the preparatory class, to which they transmit all the orders coming from the adepts initiated in the mysteries, even from those of the highest degrees with the very names of which they are unacquainted, and thus constitute a link between the two extremities. [*5] Both the intermediary and preparatory classes, however, form but the lower part of the edifice. The Prefects of the Chapters of the Scotch Knights are rather tools than superiors; they receive their impulse from the higher mysteries. It is there that the grand polity of the Order is to be sought for in the instructions laid down for the Epopt and the Regent, and these are the instructions which, beginning with those of the Epopt, demand our utmost attention. Footnotes ^529:1 Letters to Cato, 15th March 1781, and 16th February 1782. ^529:2 Letter to Cato, 15th March, 1781. ^529:3 Vol. II. Let. 2, from Spartacus to Cato. ^529:4 Degree of Major Illuminee, Instruction 4th. ^529:5 See this degree, Instruction the 2d, No. 2. Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford [1798], at sacred-texts.com [p. 530] CHAP. XIV. Of the Government and Political Instructions for the Epopts. ENLIGHTEN nations; that is to say, efface from the minds of the people what we call religious and political prejudices; make yourself master of the public opinion; and, this empire once established, all the constitutions which govern the world will disappear.--Such are the grand means, such the hopes, on which Weishaupt has been observed in his mysteries to have grounded his hopes of success. We have seen even the sciences involved in the vortex of his conspiracies. They were to be swept into the common mass of ruin with religion, laws, Princes, nations, our towns and stationary habitations.--Vandalism and the era of barbarism were to be revived, and science was to be reduced to that of the nomade and savage clans equal and free. This gigantic mass of destruction could be the operation but of a general corruption and perversion of the public opinion, which is itself dependent on science, or at least upon the reputation of wisdom and knowledge which he possesses who pretends to instruct us. To prepare the attack, therefore, it was necessary to make the sciences serve under the banners of the Sect in the cause of their own annihilation, and through their means captivate the public opinion in favour of the Sect. Its errors once triumphant, and every thing dear and sacred to man vandalized and overthrown; sciences would of themselves shrink back and vanish from before the man savage and free. Such were the fruits of Weishaupt's meditations, such the spirit which dictated the laws given to his Epopts. This degree was to extend the conquests of the Sect over public opinion by science, or, in other words, to dispense its anti-religious and antisocial doctrines under the bewitching name of science. He entirely devoted his degree of Epopts to the sciences, and may be said to have forestalled them all, that he might usurp and dictate to the public opinion; or, rather, tainted them all, to make them subservient to his views; well assured that they would not survive the contagion. In his Minerval degree, it was the minds of the young adepts that he wished to pervert; but in his degree of Epopt, his means and views expand, and, under the same mask, he aims at nothing less than the perversion of the whole universe. He formed it into a secret academy, whose hidden ramifications, widely spreading throughout the globe, were, by means [p. 531] of the disastrous laws he had combined, at one blow to annihilate all society and the empire of science. The plan may appear inconceivable, and above the reach of the most disorganizing genius; but let the reader remember how clearly it has been proved in the mysteries, that Weishaupt and his followers were firmly resolved to bring back the human race to the days of the Huns and Vandals, and, by means of this Vandalism, to all the ignorance of the nomade and savage clans; and to reduce the standard of science to that of the Equality and Liberty of Sans-culotism. Let the reader now condescend to follow me in the exposition of the lessons which the Sect has appropriated to the instruction of its Epopts, and the organization of their academy. "The illuminized Priests, or Epopts, are presided over by a Dean chosen by themselves. They are to be known to the inferior degrees only under the appellation of Epopt--their meetings are called Synods. All the Epopts within the circle of the same district compose a Synod; but each district shall contain no more than nine Epopts, exclusive of the Dean and Prefect of the Chapter. The higher superiors may attend these Synods." "Of the nine Epopts, seven preside over the sciences distributed under as many heads in the following order: "I. Physics.--Under this head are comprehended Dioptrics, Catoptrics, Hydraulics and Hydrostatics; Electricity, Magnetism, Attraction, &c." "II. Medicine--comprising Anatomy, Chirurgery, Chymistry, &c." "III. Mathematics.--Algebra; Architecture, civil and military; Navigation, Mechanics, Astronomy, &c." "IV. Natural History.--Agriculture, Gardening, Economics, the Knowledge of Insects and Animals including Man, Mineralogy, Metallurgy, Geology, and the science of the earthly phenomena." "V. Politics--which embraces the study of Man, a branch in which the Major Illuminees furnish the materials; Geography, History, Biography, Antiquity, Diplomatics; the political history of Orders, their design, their progress, and their mutual dissentions." This last article seems to have the divers Orders of Masonry in view. A nota bene is added in the original, with a particular injunction to attend to this article, which the dissentions of the Illuminees and Freemasons had probably rendered of great importance to the Sect. "VI. The Arts.--Mechanics, Painting, Sculpture, Engraving, Music, Dancing, Eloquence, Poetry, Rhetoric, all the branches of Literature; the Trades." "VII. The Occult Sciences.--The study of the Oriental tongues, and others little known, the secret methods of writing, the art of decyphering; the art of raising the seals of the letters of others, and that of preserving their own from similar practices; Petcshaften zu erbrechen, and fur das erbrechen zu bewahren. The study of ancient and modern hieroglyphics; and, once more, of secret societies, Masonic systems, &c. &c." [p. 532] Should the reader feel his indignation roused by the art of raising the seals and violating the secrecy of letters, and at seeing an adept named in each district to preside over this strange science, let him not forget that I am but the translator and transcriber of the code of the Sect. [*1] The two remaining Epopts, who in the synod are named to preside over any particular science, are made secretaries to the Dean, and serve him as coadjutors. These functions once distributed, the Epopts are to renounce all other business political or domestic, and every care but that of perfecting themselves in the branch of science which they are to superintend, and of secretly forwarding the brethren of the inferior degrees in the sciences to which they had devoted themselves. The grand object of this institution is to inspire the pupils with the greatest confidence in the Order, from an idea that it will furnish them with all the means and lights necessary for the prosecution of the study they have adopted. The Insinuators have held out the promise to them, and the Order has engaged to fulfil it. This idea of a scientific society, and of which they have the honour of being members, is to encourage in them a docility and veneration for their chiefs naturally due to men whose precepts appear to be emanations of light and of the most transcendent wisdom. The artifice in some sort answers to the promise. Every Novice, on being admitted into the Minerval schools, was to begin by declaring to what art or science he meant to devote himself, unless indeed his pocket was to be assessed for the tax which his genius could not pay. This declaration is transmitted from the inferior lodges to the Provincial, who forwards it to the Dean; by whom notice of it is given to the Epopt who presides over that particular branch of science; and he inscribes his name on the list of those pupils whose labours fall under his inspection. In future, and by the same conveyance, all the essays, discourses, treatises, &c. which the Sect requires of the young Minerval are transmitted to the same Epopt. The first advantage accruing to the Order from this law is the pointing out to the inspecting Epopt those whom the code calls the best heads of the Order. Should any doubts arise in the minds of the pupils, any difficulties to vanquish, or any questions to propose; they have been taught that the Order is the fountain of science, that they have but to apply to their superiors, and light will instantaneously shine upon them. They are ignorant as to who these superiors may be; but that will not hinder their doubts and questions from reaching the presiding Epopt: and he has divers means of solving them, and of never being taken unawares. In the first place the Epopt must have prepared himself for certain questions, which he either has or ought to have foreseen. Many of them will have been already solved by his predecessors, by his brother Epopts of other districts or even nations. The Order is exceedingly careful in collecting all these answers, and putting them into such hands as may employ them according to the views of the Sect. Each Epopt is particularly enjoined to study those which relate to his branch; he is even to make an alphabetical [p. 533] entry of them on his tablets, that he may always have them at hand whenever he wishes to turn to them. If, notwithstanding all these precautions, the Epopt should find himself unprepared or unable to solve the difficulty proposed, he will apply to the Dean, who will send the required solution or have recourse to the Provincial. But, lest the Superiors should find their occupations too often interrupted by such applications, it is expressly enjoined to the Epopt not to have recourse to them but in cases of absolute necessity, and not to make the acquisitions of their Superiors an encouragement to their own negligence.--It may so happen, that the Provincial is not able to give the required solution; he will then propose it to all the Epopts of his province. If that does not succeed, application is made to the National Inspector, and from him it is referred to the Areopagites and General. On such occasions all the learned men of the Order are consulted. Before this last appeal, it is ordained in the statutes, that the Epopt may propose the questions to the prophane; but in so doing he is on no account to discover that the Sect has recourse to, or stood in need of their information, nor what use it makes of it. This is particularly enjoined to the presiding Epopt in the following terms:--"As often as your own knowledge and that of your pupils shall not suffice, you may ask the advice of learned strangers, and turn their knowledge to the advantage of our Order, but without letting them perceive it:" (ohne dass sie es bemerken.) This precaution is the more to be insisted on, as one of the grand objects of the Epopts must be, "to attain such perfection in science, that Illuminism shall never be beholden to the prophane; but that the latter, on the contrary, shall perpetually stand in need of the lights of the Order." [*2] That the Epopt may not recur too frequently to the superiors, or to the prophane, an artifice has been invented by which he may profit of all the acquisitions of the pupils of his district, while he makes them believe that the whole flows from the unknown superiors. This artifice consists in proposing such questions as he is not perfectly master of, to the different lodges, and then studying and combining the various answers that he receives. All the Epopts of the province do as much in their several districts. Each one selects those parts which he has judged worthy of notice in the productions of the lodges; these he inspects, and lays them before the provincial and annual assembly. There other Epopts are employed in compiling from these selections, and in preparing the required solutions of the proposed questions, or in commenting on such passages as may elucidate others that may hereafter arise. The same plan is followed in all the provinces, and the reports of the provinces will form a new collection to be digested under the inspection of the National Chief, or even of the Areopagites. This will be a new treasure for the secret library of the Epopts, and furnish them with new means of maintaining in the minds of their pupils the high idea they have conceived of the knowledge of their Superiors. [*3] It will also furnish materials for the formation of a systematic Code or complete course of study for the use of the Sect. [*4] Here we cannot but remark how much arts and sciences would be benefited and promoted by the labours of a society which, actuated by quite [p. 534] other views, and despising that affectation of secrecy, should employ the same means and be animated with a similar zeal in the discussion of useful truths. But the united efforts of the Epopts are concentrated in their pursuit of science, only to debase it, by directing all its powers toward the overthrow of Religion and Governments, the triumph of their disorganizing systems, and always under the stale pretext of subjecting mankind to Nature alone. [*5] Should the reader be curious to know to what uses the Epopt turns all the science which he is supposed to acquire daily, let him observe the questions which this presiding Illuminee either solves himself, or proposes for the solution of the adepts. Let his judgement on the questions and on their tendency, be guided by the expressions of the Code: "The Epopt," says the Code, "must keep a list of a very great number of important questions proper for investigation, and which he may eventually propose to the young adepts.--In the branch of practical Philosophy, for example, he will propose for investigation the question, how far the principle is true, that all means are allowable, when employed for a laudable end? How far this maxim is to be limited to keep the proper medium between Jesuitical abuse, and the scrupulosity of prejudice? Questions of this nature shall be sent to the Dean, who shall transmit them to the Minerval schools for the investigation of the young adepts, and their dissertations will swarm with a multitude of ideas, new, bold, and useful, which will greatly enrich our Magazine." [*6] We despise this infamous aspersion on the Jesuits. Let those pass sentence on them who have learned to judge them by their conduct and by their real doctrines, and not by calumnious assertions, or satires which, in spite of all the powers of genius and irony, have been justly condemned by various tribunals as replete with falsehood and misrepresentation. [*7] Let those who have been educated by the Jesuits pronounce on these atrocious imputations of the Illuminees; I do not think myself bound to follow the example of the celebrated Hoffman, Professor at the University of Vienna, one of the most formidable adversaries of the Illuminizing Sect, by inserting a long justification of that persecuted Order. [*8] But it is impossible not to observe, that the legislator of Illuminism has not the most distant idea of modifying or limiting this famous principle, the end sanctifies the means; his object is evidently to give rise to ideas, new, bold, and useful to the Sect; or, in other words, to dispose the young adepts hereafter to decide as he has already done, that nothing is criminal, not even robbery or theft, provided it be useful to the views and forward the grand object of Illuminism. He wishes by means of these questions to acquire an early insight into the minds of the adepts, and to distinguish those who will hereafter be the most worthy of his higher mysteries, by the greater or smaller disposition they show to stifle the cries of conscience and remorse in the perpetration of the crimes necessary for the future success of his plots. This is the sum total of the science to be carefully inculcated by the Epopts in the branch of practical Philosophy. With respect to Religion, it is not even admitted among the sciences to be studied by the Epopts; the Code has, however, furnished them with a [p. 535] means of traducing and blaspheming it.--That the Epopt may never be at a loss for questions of this nature to solve or propose, he will have them noted on a register in alphabetical order. "For example," says the Code, "at the Letter C in the register of secret sciences and hieroglyphics the word Cross is to be found, and under it is the following note--For the antiquity of this hieroglyphic, consult such a work, printed such a year, such a page, or else such a manuscript, signature M." [*9] It is not necessary to be endowed with any extraordinary share of perspicacity to see that the whole object of these pretended secret sciences, or hieroglyphics, is merely to teach the young pupils to view the Cross in no other light than as an ancient hieroglyphic erected by ignorance and superstition into a symbol of the redemption of mankind. The illuminized explanation of this glorious symbol will, doubtless, long remain buried in the Occult Sciences of the Order. Meanwhile we may defy them to point out in the history of mankind any nation whatever revering the cross as the symbol of salvation anterior to the grand epoch when the Son of Man died on the cross to consummate the triumph of Christianity. The Epopts have also their historians and annalists, and their duties are laid down in the Code. The following rules may be remarked:--Each province of Illuminism must have its historian, in imitation of the ancient annalists and chronologists. He is to keep a journal, in which, beside facts of public notoriety, he will particularly collect, and even give the preference to, anecdotes of secret history.--He will endeavour to redeem from oblivion all men of merit, however deep they may have sunk into obscurity--He will make them known to the Provincial, who will inform the Brethren of their situation--Each Provincial will have a Calendar of his own, in which (instead of saints) for each day of the year shall be inscribed the name of some man as an object of veneration or execration, according as he has merited or demented of the Sect. My name may perhaps be inscribed under the black letter; but I anticipate the glory and consolation of seeing it by the side of that of Zimmerman and of Hoffman, who, like myself, are entitled to the sable wreath twined by Illuminism for its most strenuous opponents. But how different is that to which the Code declares that all the Brethren may aspire!--, to be seated beside a Brother Mirabeau or a Marat. The same laws ordain, that the Chronologist shall inform the Minerval Lodges of all memorable facts.--He will not fail to insert all mean and odious actions, nor to paint them in their proper colours. He will not pass unnoticed those of men occupying the first dignities, or enjoying the highest consideration. [*10] Next to the laws of the historian follow those for the Epopt who superintends that branch of science relating to politics, and particularly to the knowledge of mankind. The reader has already seen what stress the Order lays upon this science, and how much they make it depend on the spirit of observation--Let no Brother pretend to the dignity of Epopt, nor to the honour of presiding over any branch of science, until he has answered the three following questions--What is the spirit of observation?--How is this [p. 536] spirit to be acquired, and what constitutes a good observer?--What method is to be followed, in order to make just and exact observations?--When an Epopt has sufficiently distinguished himself by his answers on these heads, to be judged worthy of being chosen the chief of the observers or scrutators, he is entrusted with all those notes which the reader has seen the Sect so carefully collecting on the character, the passions, the talents, and history of the Brethren. When these notes contain the portrait or life of any adept more than commonly interesting, he will make him (without naming him) the object of various questions to be proposed to the Minerval Schools. He will ask, for example, What are the ideas which a man, with such and such passions or dispositions, will adopt or reject?--How on such data can such and such inclinations be encouraged or weakened?--What adept could be employed with most advantage in such a business?--What must such a man's ideas be on Religion and Governments?--Can he be looked upon as being superior to all prejudices, and ready to sacrifice his own personal interest to that of Truth?--Should he be deficient in confidence and attachment, what means should be employed to invigorate them, and what sort of man would be the fittest for such an undertaking?--Finally, what employment in the state, or in the Order, would he fill to the greatest advantage, or in which would he be the most useful? The Scrutator in chief digests these answers into a proper statement, which he sends to the Dean. The Provincial receives it from the Dean, and is thus enabled to form his judgement, whether that particular adept be a moral, disinterested, beneficent man, and free from all prejudice; whether he can be useful to the Order, and in what way he can be best employed.--From the result of such observations, the scrutinizing Epopt will carefully select rules and general maxims on the knowledge of mankind. He will make a compilation of them, and transmit them to the Superiors. [*11] "By means," says the Code, "of these and such like observations, the Order will be enabled to make discoveries of every kind, to form new systems, and to give on all subjects irrefragable proofs of its labours and its immense fund of science; and the public will give it credit for being in possession of all human knowledge. [*12] Lest any of the prophane should partake of this honour, or that any one of the members should not direct these sciences toward the object of Illuminism, precautions are taken in the Code to assure the exclusive advantage of these labours to the Sect. "Particular parts of these sciences and discoveries may be printed by permission of the Superiors; but the law adds, not only these books shall not be communicated to any of the prophane, but as they will never be printed elsewhere than at the presses of the Sect, they will only be entrusted to the Brethren according to the rank they hold in the Order." [*13] "That our worthy co-operators may not be divested of the glory of their labours, every new principle laid down, machine invented, or discovery made, shall for ever bear the name of its inventor, that his memory may be revered by future ages." [*14] [p. 537] "On the same grounds it is strictly enjoined, that no member shall ever communicate to the prophane any discovery that he may have made in the Order--No book treating of these discoveries shall be printed without the permission of the Superiors; and hence arises the general regulation, that no Brother shall publish any of his productions without leave of the Provincial. He also is to decide whether the work is of a nature to be printed by the secret presses of the Order, and what particular Brethren may be allowed the perusal of it--Should it be necessary to dismiss any of the Brethren from the Order, the local Superior is to receive notice that he may have the necessary time to withdraw from him not only the manuscripts, but even the printed works of the Order." [*15] The Illuminizing Legislator, in justification of all these precautions, , in the first place, the undeniable right vested in the Order to all the labours of its Brethren; then the lure of secrecy, which stimulates curiosity and the thirst of science; finally, the advantage accruing to the sciences themselves, by being preserved among men who only impart them to others so prepared as to render them of the greatest possible utility--Beside, says he, every man has it in his power to make himself an Illuminee if he pleases, and to partake of their science; and who better able to render them useful to mankind, or to preserve them, than we are? After this justification, which the reader may appreciate, he returns to his Epopts, and tells them, that it is incumbent on them to direct and turn all the sciences toward the views of Illuminism. "The wants of every country are to be maturely considered, as well as those of your district; let them be the objects of deliberation in your Synods; and ask instructions of your Superiors." Then the Legislator makes a sudden transition, and expands his views far beyond his Lodges. The reader will scarcely suspect whither they tend. Let him read, and learn the grand object of the Epopts, what conquests they are to make for the Order, and whither they are to extend the systems of Illuminism. "You will," abruptly exclaims the legislator, "incessantly form new plans, and try every means, in your respective provinces, to seize upon the public education, the ecclesiastical government, the chairs of literature, and the pulpit." [*16]--This is one of the grand objects of the Sect; and we shall see the Code treating of it again in another part. To enhance the merits of his plans, and to insinuate his adepts into the ecclesiastical seminaries, and even into the pulpit, under the shadow of his pretended science, "the Epopt must find means of acquiring the reputation of a man of transcendent learning; wherever he appears, whether walking or stopping, sitting or standing, let rays of light encircle his head, which shall enlighten all who approach him. Let every one think himself happy in hearing the pure truth from his lips. Let him on all occasions, combat prejudice; but with precaution, and according to the rules laid down, with dexterity and with all the respect due to the persons he is addressing." [*17] Who could believe that these were lessons given to a modern Vandal by his disorganizing legislator, whose heart thirsts after the happy period when that encircling light of his Epopts shall [p. 538] have Vandalized the whole universe, and nations shall have disappeared from off the face of the earth? But the Epopt has yet to aim at another conquest, that of the empire over the literary world. "In the literary world certain writings generally take the lead for a time, according to the fashion, and inspire feeble minds with admiration. At one time the enthusiastic productions of Religion, at another the sentimental novels of wit, or perhaps philosophical reveries, pastorals, romances on chivalry, epic poems, or odes, will inundate the republic of letters. The Epopt will turn all his skill toward bringing into fashion the principles of our Order, the sole tendency of which is the happiness of mankind." Or, in other words, those baleful principles which, under the pretence of rendering human nature more happy and united in one family, aim at nothing less than destroying every Religion, every title to property, every town, every fixed residence, and every nation. "Our principles must be made fashionable, that the young writers may diffuse them among the people, and serve the Order without intending it." [*18] "In order to raise the public spirit, he must with the greatest ardour preach up the general interest of humanity, and inculcate the utmost indifference for all associations or secret unions which are only formed among the subjects of one particular nation. [*19] Here the impious legislator blasphemously cites for an example Christ, and his pretended indifference for his family. Because Christ died for the redemption of all mankind, because his affection for the most holy of mothers never made him lose sight of that great work, is that a ground on which the illuminizing Epopt shall persuade his simple auditory, that to love all mankind is to dissolve the bonds of nations? As a farther rule for acquiring this literary empire, "He will take care that the writings of the members of the Order shall be cried up, and that the trumpet of fame shall be sounded in their honour. He will also find means of hindering the reviewers from casting any suspicions on the writers of the Sect." [*20] With respect to the Literati, and writers who, without belonging to the Order, show principles coinciding with ours, should they be what we call GOOD, "class them among those who are to be enrolled. Let the Dean have a list of those men, and from time to time he will hand it about among the brethren." [*21] Let us now take a cursory view of these laws, and of their gradual tendency to infect the whole literary world. In its Minerval academies the sect begins by forming its pupils; and the care with which its disorganizing principles are instilled into the young adept has already been displayed. Lest any of these principles should swerve from the grand object, the Epopts oversee all the schools of the same district; these latter have their provincial assemblies, where every thing is prepared, combined, and foreseen. At this assembly the Epopt attends, bringing with him his notes and observations on his particular district, and on those means which may there contribute to the advancement or disparagement of the Illuminizing principles and science. The minutes of these assemblies are sent to the National Inspector, who overlooks [p. 539] the whole, and sees that the original spirit is every where preserved; and the Areopagites hold the same line of conduct with respect to all nations that he does within his particular one. Hence then the Minerval academies, the Epopts, the Provincials, the National Inspectors, in a word, the disorganizing whole, form but one and the same invisible academy, spreading its subterraneous ramifications, every where infusing the same principles, actuated by the same spirit, and subjected to the same laws: and these laws, this science, are but the machinations and the forebodings of universal impiety and disorganization. But the union and universality of this conspiring academy is not sufficient for the Sect; it extends its views to the public schools and to the pulpit. The man of letters, the transcendent genius, all are to bend beneath its laws, and fashion is to aid its plots. From the child that spells, to the Doctor enveloped in mazy science, all are to be subjected to Illuminism; and science itself, so instrumental to the progress of the Sect, shall sink beneath the effort of bringing forth that Vandalism which is to annihilate the altar and the throne, all laws, individual property, and national society. Let the reader compare the mysteries of the Sect with the code of its Epopts, and pronounce if such be not the real tendency of this Empire of Science. Horror impresses the mind, and indignation rises at such a sight.--But the monstrous legislator who has compiled them pretends that they are entitled to the admiration of the young adepts; and it is his Epopts who are to inspire them with this admiration. "You must," says he, "infuse so great a respect for the sublimity and sanctity of our Order, that a promise made by the adepts on the honour of Illuminism shall be more binding than the most sacred oath." [*22] At length the Atheist has found an equivalent for the name of God. He seeks bonds to bind his followers, and he has broken those of conscience; he appeals to honour, and perverts it into a bond of villany. "He (says Weishaupt) who shall dare violate the oath he shall have sworn on the honour of my Society, shall be declared infamous. I care not what his rank may be, his infamy shall be proclaimed throughout the whole Order, and it shall be so without remission or hope of pardon. My intention is, that the Members should be informed of this, that they should deliberately reflect on the sacredness of this oath in my Order, I mean that the consequences of it should be clearly and warmly represented to them." [*23] The Epopts charged with this mission are of a degree too much revered in the Order to compromise their dignity. They attend, at pleasure, the meetings of the inferior degrees, but they are never to occupy any office in them, excepting that of Prefect of the Scotch Knights. Their presence might overawe and intimidate the young adepts, and thus be detrimental to the observations they are ordered to make; for (so far from constraint), the Epopt is to endeavour to study them in their most unguarded moments. He is therefore never to intermix with them but as their equal. There is a particular law forbidding him to disclose the degree or the class to which he belongs, or even his costume. [*24] Thus, hiding his superiority, and seated on the same benches beside the young adepts, he exercises his functions of Scrutator more [p. 540] freely among them in mutual intercourse, and he judges better of the talents of each. His lessons, coming apparently from an equal, will sink deeper into their minds; and, without betraying his authority, he will the better observe their progress and their failings.--Should any of these pupils have shown a zeal and fidelity beyond all doubt, he may take them into his confidence; he will point them out to the Dean, who may call them about his person and make them his Acolites. The Dean may even throw a great part of the weight of his correspondence on them, and carry them to the Synod of the Epopts, until they shall have shown themselves worthy of being initiated to all the mysteries reserved for this class. [*25] Thus ends that part of the Code which is to be communicated to the Epopts. The following Chapters will delineate the laws and instructions which are to guide their conduct when admitted to the degree of Regent or Prince of Illuminism. Footnotes ^540:1 Instructions for this degree, Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 11. ^540:2 Instructions for the degree, No. 2, 5, 6, 9. ^540:3 Nos. 5 and 12. ^540:4 No. 15. ^540:5 Das der Order die bisherigen systeme entbehren, und eigene, auf die natur allein gegrundete systeme seinen anhanger vorlegen konne. ^540:6 Ibid. No. 7. ^540:7 See Art. PASCAL in the Historical Dictionary of Flexier Dureval, last Edition. ^540:8 Vide Hoch wichtige erinnerungen--Von Leopold-alois--Hoffman. Sect. V. Page 279 to 307. ^540:9 Ibid. No. 15. ^540:10 Ibid. No. 18. ^540:11 Ibid. No. 18. ^540:12 Ibid. No. 20. ^540:13 Ibid. No. 17. ^540:14 Ibid. No. 23. ^540:15 Ibid. No. 24. ^540:16 Mussen stets neue plane entworfen und eingefuhrt werden: Wie man die hande in erziehungswesen, geistliche regierung, lehr, und predigt-stuhle in der provinz bekomme. Ibid. No. 28. ^540:17 Ibid. No. 2. ^540:18 Damit junge schriftsteller dergleichen unter das volk ausbreiten, und uns, ohne dass sie es wissen, dienen. ^540:19 Ibid. No. 3. ^540:20 Ibid. No. 4. ^540:21 Ibid. No. 5. ^540:22 Ibid. No. 29. ^540:23 Original Writings, Vol. II. Let. 8, to Cato. ^540:24 Ibid. No. 31. ^540:25 Ibid. No. 32. Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford [1798], at sacred-texts.com [p. 541] CHAP. XV. Instructions for the Regent or Prince Illuminee, on the Government of the Order. THE prominent feature of all the instructions given by the Illuminizing Legislator to his Epopts is the consecration of their degree to the perversion of the public opinion, and to the attainment of the empire of sciences, that he may direct them all to the support of his disorganizing Equality and Liberty and to universal anarchy. This mission of perversion requires an assiduity to which not many men are equal; but adepts may be found, who, unable to distinguish themselves in such missions, may yet be endowed with a sufficient zeal and with the necessary talents for the superintendance and direction of the Brethren. There are others again whose disastrous successes are to be recompensed by the higher employments in the Order; and it is from these two classes of Epopts that the Order selects its Regents. It is also for their instruction that the Legislator descends into all the gubernatory minutiae of his Illuminism.--His instructions are comprised under four different heads. I. General System of Government for the Order.--II. Instructions for the degree of Regent.--III. Instructions for the Prefects or Local Superiors.--IV. Instructions for the Provincial. [*1] I have, it is true, been obliged to anticipate many parts of this Code when unfolding the artifices of the lower degrees; but as a confirmation of what has already been exposed, in order to bring the different objects within one point of view, and to show the dangers of his disastrous combinations, let us attend to the Legislator when treating of the whole collectively. What particularly endeared this degree of Regent to Weishaupt was, that part of his instruction which takes a general view, and which lays open the progressive plan to be observed in the government of the Brethren. The reader perusing the instructions in the same order in which Weishaupt has written them, will more easily conceive the cause of his predilection. Instruction A. Plan of the General Government of the Order. "I. The most high and excellent Superiors of the illustrious Order of true Freemasonry do not immediately attend to the minutiae of the edifice.--They [p. 542] must not, however, on that account be considered as contributing less to our happiness, by their counsels, their lessons, their plans, and the many and powerful resources with which they furnish us. "II. These excellent and most gracious Superiors have established a class of Masons to whom they have entrusted the whole plan of our Order. This class is that of the Regents. . . . . "III. In this plan our Regents hold the first dignities. Until admitted to this degree, no person can hold the office of Prefect or of Local Superior. "IV. Every country has its national Superior, who holds an immediate correspondence with our Fathers, at the head of whom is a General who holds the helm of the Order. "V. Under the National and his Assistants are the Provincials, who each govern their Circle or their Province. "VI. Every Provincial is surrounded by his Counsellors. "VII. Each Provincial also commands a certain number of Prefects, who may in like manner have their coadjutors in their districts. All these, as well as the Dean, belong to the class of Regents. "VIII. All these offices are for life, excepting in cases of deposition or ejectment. "IX. The Provincial is to be chosen by the Regents of his province and the National Superiors, and approved by the National.--[I do not understand how the Code distinguishes between the several National Superiors and the National in chief; unless it be, that it denotes in this place as Superiors those who are called a little higher up Assistants (Gehulfen) of this chief.] "X. The whole success of Illuminism depending on the Regents, it is but just that their domestic wants should be provided for. They shall therefore be the first supplied from out of the funds of the Order. "XI. The Regents of each Province form a particular body immediately under the Provincial, whom they are to obey. . . . . . "XII. The offices of Illuminism not being considered in the light of dignities, nor of places of honour, but as mere employments freely accepted, the Regents must be always ready to labour for the good of the Order, each according to his situation and to his talents. Age is never to be set forth as a title. It may often happen, that the youngest is chosen Provincial, and the eldest only a Local Superior or Counsellor, should the one live in the center, while the other only inhabits the extremity of the Province; or, should the former, on account of his natural activity or his station in life, be more fitted for the place of Superior than the latter, though far more eloquent. In many cases, for example, a Regent is not to think it beneath his dignity to offer himself to discharge any of the lesser offices in the Minerval churches (lodges) in he may be useful. "XIII. That the Provincial may not be overburdened with too extensive a correspondence, all the Quibus Licets, and all the letters of the Regents, shall pass through the hands of the Prefect, unless the Provincial gives Orders to the contrary. [p. 543] "XIV. But the Prefect shall not open the letters of the Regents. Those he must transmit to the Provincial, who will forward them to their proper destination. "XV. The Provincial has the power of convoking the whole of his Regents, or merely those whom he may think proper, considering the exigencies of the Province. He who cannot attend according to his summons must give the proper notice at least four weeks prior to the meeting. Beside, he is always to be ready to give in an account of what he has done for the Order until that period, and show willingness to fulfil the intentions of his Provincial and of his high Superiors. The convocation of Regents must take place at least once a year. "XVI. The following instruction (B) will point out more particularly to the Regents those objects to which they must chiefly attend. "XVII. It has been already observed, that great attention is to be paid to the gradually procuring of funds for the Order. This may be accomplished by attending to the following rules: "Each province is to be entrusted with the expenditure of its own monies, and only remit small contributions to the Superiors for the expences of postage. Each Lodge also is to enjoy the full propriety of its funds (eigenthumlich)--when for any great enterprize the assembly of the Regents levy contributions on the funds of the different Lodges, they shall be considered but as loans, and shall be made good to the Lodges with full interest." Has the Illuminizing Legislator then forgotten, that it was PROPERTY which gave the first deadly blow to Equality and Liberty? Certainly not; but more than ONE great enterprize will be necessary to prepare the LAST, which is to annihilate all property whatsoever; meanwhile the Order is glad to enjoy its own, and to make the inferior Lodges believe that they are not to be pillaged of any thing that belongs to them. "The Provincial has no fund allotted to him, but he has an exact return of all those of his province." "The general receipts will consist--1 degrees. In the contributions paid on the receptions of Masons (freymaurer-receptions-gelder)--2 degrees. In the over-plus of the monthly contributions--3 degrees. In voluntary subscriptions--4 degrees. In fines--5 degrees. In legacies and donations--6 degrees. In our commerce and traffic (handel und gewerbe)." "The expences are--1 degrees. The expences of the meetings, postage, decorations, and some few --2 degrees. Pensions to the poor brethren who have no other means of subsistence--3 degrees. Sums paid for the promotion of the grand object of the Order--4 degrees. Sums paid for the encouraging of talents--5 degrees. The expences of experiments and trials--6 degrees. For widows and children--7 degrees. For foundations." Thus terminates the first part of the instructions for the Regent. After the reading of this, which takes place on the day of his inauguration, his attention is called to the following: [p. 544] Instruction B for the whole degree of Regent The reader has seen (ut supra, art. xvi.) the Regent forewarned to pay a particular attention to this second part of the instructions. Let the reader also profit of the hint. He will see that many of the arcana of the Sect still remain to be revealed. "I. The object of the Order being to render man more happy, virtue more attractive, and vice less powerful, it is necesssary that our brethren, the teachers and governors of mankind, should publicly assume an unimpeachable character. A Regent of Illuminism therefore will be the most perfect of men. He will be prudent, provident, ingenious, irreproachable, and of manners so urbane that his company shall be courted with avidity. He is to acquire the reputation of being enlightened, benevolent, honest, disinterested, and full of ardour for great and extraordinary enterprises, all contributing to the general good." It would be useless to recall to the mind of my reader what is to be understood, in the language of Illuminism, by virtue, vice, or public good. He will therefore on reflection be the less surprised at perusing the following instructions framed for these virtuous teachers and governors of mankind. "II. The Regents are to study the means of ruling and governing without betraying any such intention. [*2] Under the mask of humility, but of a real and candid humility, grounded on the persuasion of their own weakness, and on the conviction that their whole strength rests on our union, they must exercise an absolute and boundless dominion, [*3] and must direct every thing toward the attainment of the views of the Order." "Let them avoid a pedantic reserve, at once disgusting and ridiculous in the eyes of the sage. Let them give the example of a respectful submission to the Superiors. Should they be possessed of the advantages of birth, it will be an additional reason for showing their obedience to a Superior born in a lower station of life--Let their conduct vary according to the persons with whom they have to deal. Let the Regent be the confidant of one, the father of another, the scholar of a third; very seldom a severe and inexorable Superior, and even on such occasions let him show with how much unwillingness he exercises such severity. He will say, for example, that he sincerely wishes the Order had given so disagreeable a commission to some other person; and that he is weary of acting the part of schoolmaster with a man who should long since have known how to conduct himself. "III. The grand object of our sacred legions spread throughout the universe being the triumph of virtue and of wisdom, every Regent must endeavour to establish a certain equality among men.--Let him take the part of those who are too much debased, and humble the proud. Let him never suffer the fool to lord it too much over the man of wit, the wicked over the good, the ignorant over the learned, nor the weak over the strong, though the latter should in reality be in the wrong. [*4] [p. 545] "IV. The means of acquiring an ascendancy over men are incalculable. Who could enumerate them all?. . . They must vary with the disposition of the dines. At one period it is a taste for the marvellous and extraordinary that is to be wrought upon. At another the lure of secret societies is to be held out. "For this reason it is very proper to make your inferiors believe, without telling them the real state of the case, that all other secret societies, particularly that of Freemasonry, are secretly directed by us. Or else, and it IS REALLY THE FACT IN SOME STATES, THAT POTENT MONARCHS ARE GOVERNED BY OUR ORDER. When any thing remarkable or important comes to pass, hint that it originated with our Order.--Should any person by his merit acquire a great reputation, let it be generally understood that he is one of us." How smoothly flows this combination of artifice from the pen of the Illuminizing Legislator! But I hope that my reader will not expect to find a method in my translation, where the Legislator has disdained method. It is easy to perceive, that to heap artifice upon artifice is much more his object, than to give a studied connection to principles with which he supposes his adepts to be sufficiently impressed. Or may it not be said, that this disorder is the effect of studied art? But let us proceed and trace the steps of Weishaupt. "With no other object than to give your orders the appearance of coming from a mysterious hand, you may, for example, put a letter under the plate of an adept when dining at an inn, though it might have been a much less trouble to forward it to him at his own lodgings--You may attend large and commercial towns during the time of fairs in different characters, as a Merchant, an Officer, an Abbe. Every where you will personate an extraordinary man having important business on your hands.--But all this must be done with a great deal of art and caution, lest you should have the appearance of an adventurer. It is to be well understood, that these characters are not to be assumed in towns where you are likely to be discovered either by the Police or the standers-by.--At other times, you may write your orders with a chemical preparation of ink, which disappears after a certain time. "V. A Regent is as much as possible to hide from his inferiors all his weaknesses, even his ill-health, or disgusts; at any rate, he is never to complain. "VI. Here he repeats the instruction on the art of flattering and gaining over women to their cause, already transcribed, page 43. "VII. You must also gain over to the Order the COMMON PEOPLE. The great plan for succeeding in this is to influence the Schools. You may also attempt it by liberalities, or by great show and splendour; at other times by making yourself popular, and even tolerating, with an air of patience, prejudices which may hereafter be gradually eradicated. "VIII. When you have succeeded any where in making yourself master of the public authority and government, you will pretend not to have the least power, for fear of awakening the attention of those who may oppose us. But, on the contrary, when you find it impossible to succeed, you will assume the [p. 546] character of a person who has every thing at his command. That will make us both feared and sought after, and of course will strengthen our party. "IX. All the ill success or disgusts which may befall the Order are to be concealed with the utmost caution from the inferiors. "X. It is the duty of the Regents to supply the wants of the Brethren, and to procure the best employments for them, after having given the proper intimation to the Superior. "XI. The Regents shall be particularly cautious and discreet in their discourse;--but shall carefully avoid any thing denoting the least perplexity of mind--There are even some occasions whereon an extensive genius is to be affected; on others, they may pretend that their friendship has made them say a word too much; by these means the secrecy of the inferior is put to the test. They may also spread certain reports among our people, which may prepare them to receive ideas which the Order wishes to infuse into their minds. On all doubtful occasions, the Regent will consult his Superiors by means of a Quibus Licet." "XII. Whatever rank or station a Regent may hold in the Order, he will seldom answer the questions of the inferiors verbally, but generally in writing, that he may have time to reflect or even consult on the answers he should give." "XIII. The Regents will unceasingly attend to every thing relating to the grand interests of the Order, to the operations of commerce, or such things as may in any way contribute to augment the power of the Order. They will transmit all plans of that nature to the Provincial. Should it be a case requiring expedition, he will give him advice of it by some other channel than the Quibus Licets, which the Provincial has not the power of opening. "XIV. They will follow the same line of conduct with respect to every thing that tends to influence the Order in general; and find means of putting its united forces in motion at one and the same time. "XV. When an author sets forth principles true in themselves, but which do not as yet suit our general plan of education for the world; or principles the publication of which is premature; every effort must be made to gain over the author; but should all our attempts fail, and we should be unable to entice him into the Order, let him be discredited by every possible means." "XVI. If a Regent should conceive hopes of succeeding in suppressing any religious houses, and of applying their revenues to our object, for example, to the establishment of proper COUNTRY SCHOOLS; he may depend on it, that such a project would be particularly grateful to the Superiors. "XVII. The Regents will also turn their attention toward a solid plan for establishing a fund to support the widows of the brethren. "XVIII. One of our most important objects must be, to hinder the servile veneration of the people for Princes from being carried too far. All such abject flattery tends only to make those men worse who are already for the most part of very common and weak understandings. You show an example of the proper conduct to be held in this respect. Shun all familiarity with them; behave to [p. 547] them politely, but without constraint, that they may honour and fear you. Write and speak of them as you would of other men, that they may be made to recollect that they are but men like other people, and that their authority is a thing purely conventional. [*5] "XIX. When there happens to be a man of merit among our adepts but little known by or entirely unknown to the public, no pains are to be spared to acquire celebrity for him. Let our disguised brethren every where sound the trumpet of his praises, and force envy and party spirit to be silent. "XX. The essay of our principles and of our schools is most easily and most successfully made in small states. The inhabitants of capitals and commercial towns are too corrupt, too much a prey to their passions, and think themselves too much enlightened, to submit to our lessons. "XXI. It is useful to send visitors from time to time, or to give a Regent that is travelling the commission to visit the meetings, to ask for the minutes, and to call on the brethren in order to examine their papers or journals, and receive their complaints.--These Plenipotentiaries, presenting themselves in the name of the high Superiors, may correct many faults, and boldly suppress abuses which the Prefects had not the courage to reform, though ready to enforce the commands of the visitor. "XXII. If our Order cannot establish itself in any particular place with all the forms and regular progress of our degrees, some other form may be assumed. Always have the object in view; that is the essential point. No matter what the cloak may be, provided you succeed; a cloak is however always necessary, for in secrecy our strength principally lies." "XXIII. For this reason we should always conceal ourselves under the name of some other association. THE INFERIOR LODGES OF FREEMASONRY ARE THE MOST CONVENIENT CLOAKS for our grand object, (das schickliche kleid fur unsere hohere zwecke) because the world is already familiarized with the idea that nothing of importance, or worthy of their attention can spring from Masonry.--The name of a literary society is also a proper mask for our first classes. Under such a mask, should our assemblies be discovered, we may confidently assert, that the reason of our holding secret assemblies was partly to give a greater interest and charm to our pursuits; partly to keep off the crowd, and not to expose ourselves to the bantering and jealousy of others; in short to hide the weakness of an association as yet but in its infancy." "XXIV. It is of the utmost importance for us to study the constitutions of other secret societies and to govern them. The Regent is even bound, after having obtained leave of his superiors, to gain admittance into those societies, but he must not undertake too many engagements. This is an additional reason why our Order should remain secret. "XXV. The higher degrees must always be hidden from the lower. A person more willingly receives orders from a stranger than from men in whom he gradually discovers a multitude of defects. By this precaution one may keep the inferiors in a more proper awe; for they naturally pay greater attention to their behaviour when they think themselves surrounded by persons who are [p. 548] observing them; at first, their virtue may be the effect of constraint, but custom will soon make it habitual." "XXVI. Never lose sight of the military schools, of the academies, printing presses, libraries, cathedral chapters, or any public establishments that can influence education or government. Let our Regents perpetually attend to the various means, and form plans for making us masters of all these establishments." [*6] "XXVII. In general, and independent of their particular employment, the grand object of our Regents must be an habitual and constant application to every thing which can in any way add to the perfection and to the power of our Order, that it may become for future ages the most perfect model of government that can enter the mind of man;" or, in other words, that it may be hereafter said, such was the famous association which, by perpetually perfecting its laws and governments, at length taught mankind to cast off every law and every government. It would be useless for me to think of adducing farther proofs to that such is the real object of the pretended perfection of Illuminism. The mysteries of the Sect have been too clearly laid open for us to harbour the smallest doubt of their intention. But to acquire this perfection and power for the Sect, Weishaupt has modelled still farther laws for his Regents, according to the different offices they hold in the Hierarchy of the Order. [*7] Footnotes ^548:1 Last works of Philo and Spartacus, degree of Regent. ^548:2 Die Regenten sollen die kunst studieren zu herschen, ohne das ansehen davon zu haben. ^548:3 Sollen sie unumschrankt regieren. ^548:4 Er soll nicht leiden dass der dummere uber den klugern--der Schwachere uber den starkern, auch wenn dieser unrecht haben sollte, zu sehr den meister spiele. ^548:5 Eine unserer vornehmsten sorgen muss auch seyn, unter das volke sclavische fursten verehrung nicht zu hoch steigen zu lassen, &c. &c. ^548:6 Militair-schulen, academien, Buchdruckereyen, Buchladen, Dom-capitel, und alles was ein einfluss auf bildung und regierung hat, muss nie aus den augen gelassen werden; und die Regenten sollen unaufhorlich plane entwerfen, wie man es anfangen konne, uber dieselben gewalt zu bekommen. ^548:7 For the whole of the Second Part of this Chapter see the Instruction B for the Degree of Regent, of which it is nearly a literal translation. Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford [1798], at sacred-texts.com [p. 549] CHAP. XVI. Continuation of the Instructions on the Government of the Illuminees--Laws for the Local Superiors. GREAT as the authority of the Major Illuminees over the Minerval Academies may appear at first sight, no person of the preparatory class is in fact entrusted with any real authority. Even the Scotch Knight in his intermediate class does not enjoy any. The Order recognizes as real Superiors none but those who have been initiated into the class of the Mysteries. Even in that class the adept must have attained the degree of Regent before he can be named Prefect for the Scotch Knights, or Dean of his district. Those are the first two offices which the Order considers as having any real authority over the Brethren. Though the Code expressly declares, that each Superior shall find in his instructions the respective laws concerning his particular duty, it certainly contains none for the office of Dean. A single Chapter is indeed to be found in the Code on his election and consecration. On the first establishment of a new district he is elected by the Provincial; but on his deposition or death the Epopts assemble and choose a successor by the plurality of votes, the Provincial only having the right of confirming such an election. With regard to what the Code terms his consecration (Weihung des decani), it is generally performed by what is called a Plenipotentiary, and in a sort of barbarous Latin, extremely inelegant. Were not the impiety of it as abominable as the ceremonial is low, it might form an excellent scene for the theatres of Bartholomew fair. The Illuminizing Legislator, a very inferior copyist of Moliere's Malade Imaginaire, ridicules St. Paul, Moses, and all religious ceremonies, as Moliere did the quack disciples of Hippocrates. Little wit is required to scoff at religious rites, and yet our Legislator has only succeeded in being disgustingly impious. Such turpitude is not worthy of our notice, for none but Epopts can admire it; this nevertheless is all the information the Code can give us respecting the Dean. [*1] The same cannot be said of the instructions for the Prefects. These Local Superiors may have as many as eight Lodges at a time under their command, partly Minerval, and partly Masonic. The Prefect is the first Regent within his prefecture, and has the direction of all that part of the Order stiled in the Code the lower part of the edifice. All the Quibus Licets of his district pass through his hands. He opens those of the Scotch Knights, and the Solis of the Novices and Minervals; but every thing else he transmits to the higher Superiors. When [p. 550] he founds new Lodges, or receives new Brethren, he gives the new Geographical names and Characteristics, which he selects from the list that he has received from the Provincial. He makes a general report to the Provincial of every thing that has happened within his Prefecture once a month; and every three months transmits the reversal letters, the tablets sent by the Scrutators with notes on their political and moral conduct, and an exact return of the state of the funds belonging to each Lodge. He decides on the promotion of the Brethren as far as Scotch Knight, but can confer the latter degree only with the consent of the Provincial.--He has the right once a year of commanding all the adepts under his direction to return whatever writings the Order may have entrusted them with--He returns them to those on whose fidelity he has reason to rely, but not to those whom he may have any reason to suspect, or who are intended to be dismissed. [*2] The foundation of the Edifice rests solely on the vigilance, experience, and zeal of the Prefect.--And it was to the direction of their conduct in every part of the Government that Weishaupt dedicated his lessons under the following heads:--I. Preparations.--II. Tuition of the Pupils.--III. Spirit or love of the Order--IV. Subordination.--V. Secrecy.--Each of these articles contains a cloud of those artifices which the reader has seen interspersed in divers parts of the Code, but which now become the peculiar study of the Prefect. I shall only extract the most striking, or those on which the Legislator particularly insists; such, for example, as the following, to be found in the first pages of the head Preparation. "Our strength chiefly consists in numbers; but much will also depend on the means employed to form the pupil--Young people are pliant and easily take the impression. The Prefect will therefore spare no pains to gain possession of the Schools which lie within his district, and also of their teachers. He will find means of placing them under the tuition of members of our Order; for this is the true method of infusing our principles and of training our young men: it is thus that the most ingenious men are prepared to labour for us and are brought into discipline; and thus that the affection conceived by our young pupils for the Order will gain as deep root as do all other early impressions." Under the same head are to be found instructions for the Prefect equally curious, on the propagation of the Order. "When a new colony is to be founded, begin by choosing a bold and enterprizing adept entirely devoted to the Order. Send him some time beforehand to live on the spot where you intend making the new establishment." "Before you proceed to people the extremities, begin by making your ground good at the centre." "Your next object must be, to gain over such persons as are constant residents, as Merchants and Canons." "Such missions should only be entrusted to brethren of independent fortune, and who would occasion no expence to the Order; for though all the brethren [p. 551] are entitled to succour when in real want, yet those of one province are as seldom as possible to be an expence to the neighbouring ones. Nor are the other districts by any means to be made acquainted with the weakness of the Order in yours. Beside, the funds must find a sufficiency to succour those of the Minerval school who may stand in need of it, that our promises in their case may be performed." "You will not seek to extend yourself till you have consolidated your establishment in the capital of your district." "You will seriously examine and cautiously select from the Brethren those who are the most able to undertake such a mission. You will next consider whether it will be proper to begin your establishment by a Minerval Church or a MASONIC LODGE." "Pay most particular attention to the man whom you place at the head of the new colony; observe whether he is courageous, zealous, prudent, exact, and punctual; whether fitted for the forming new adepts; whether he enjoys a good reputation or is much considered; whether he is a man of business and capable of a serious and constant application; in short, whether he has all the necessary qualifications for an undertaking of such high importance." "Consider also the locality. Is the place proposed near to or distant from the capital of your district?--Is it a dangerous or safe situation for such an undertaking?--Is it great or small, more or less populous?--By what means can you best succeed, and which can be easiest employed?--What time would be requisite for the perfecting of such an establishment?--To what persons can you apply on first setting off?--If your first applications be ill made, all future attempts will be fruitless.--What pretence or what name is to be assumed?--How is the new colony to be subordinated or co-ordinated? that is to say, what Superiors shall it be under, and with what Lodges shall it correspond?" "When you shall have acquired sufficient strength in your new colony, and particularly if our Brethren enjoy the first dignities of the state, if they may freely and openly show themselves formidable to their opponents, and make them feel the painful consequences of counteracting the views of the Order; if you have wherewith to satisfy the wants of the Brethren; if, so far from having to fear from the government, the Order directs those who hold the reins--Then be assured that we shall not be wanting in numbers or in the choice of adepts; we shall soon have more than we have occasion for. I cannot too strongly recommend this method of proceeding." "If it be necessary for us to be masters of the ordinary schools, of how much more importance will it be to gain over the ecclesiastical seminaries and their superiors! With them, we gain over the chief part of the country; we acquire the support of the greatest enemies to innovation; and the grand point of all is, that through the clergy we become masters of the middle and lower classes of the people." "But remember that great caution is necessary with the Ecclesiastics. These gentlemen are generally either too free or too scrupulous; and those who are too free have seldom any morals." The legislator then proceeds to the [p. 552] exclusion of the religious, and tells the Insinuator to avoid the Jesuits as he would the plague. While perusing these laws, I suppose the reader makes nearly the same reflections which I am tempted every instant to commit to paper.--Should the following article ever meet the eye of a Prince, it will give him ample room for reflection. "When the Prefect shall have gradually succeeded in placing the most zealous members of the Order in the councils and offices under the Prince, he will have arrived at the full extent of his commission. He will hve done much more than if he had initiated the Prince himself." [*3] "In general, Princes are not to be admitted into the Order, and even those who are received are seldom to be permitted to rise above the degree of Scotch Knight." After what has been seen of this degree and those that precede, it is rather extraordinary that Weishaupt should deign to grant admission to Princes; for he did not wait for this degree before he clearly insinuated his plans. Princes, at least, who had not surmised them before their admission to that degree must have been void of penetration indeed. What hopes then could the Legislator entertain of their not perceiving his plots against all legitimate authority? His confidential letters will explain the enigma:--"Brethren," he writes to his Areopagites, "you will take care to have the following corrections made before you show the constitutions of our degrees to the Elector.--In the degree of Minor Illuminee in place of the words imbecile Monks say imbecile men--In the degree of Major Illuminee blot out the words Priests and Princes are in our way.--With respect to the degree of Priest show no part of it excepting the discourse on sciences, and read that over carefully lest any allusion or reference to any other part of the degree should remain." [*4] These corrections begin to clear the enigma; a more insidious expedient will veil his plots in complete darkness. "I mean, says Weishaupt when speaking to the Areopagites of the inferior degrees, to revise the whole system." Then, attributing to the Jesuits his own immorality, he says, "I mean that it should be a complete Jesuitical piece; not a single word shall be found in it that can in any way be cavilled at by religious or political governments. Let us act with caution; do nothing without a reason; things must be prepared and brought on step by step." [*5] The adept who has given us the most complete and candid account of the degrees of Illuminism assures us, that he had seen a discourse for the degree of Epopt in which every thing respecting religion and government was omitted. [*6] Here then we find Weishaupt not only correcting but even forming fictitious degrees to dupe the princely adept, and to persuade him that the dark and mysterious recesses of the hireling crew have been laid open to him, while the real adept smiles at his credulity. Such artifice certainly aggravates Weishaupt's criminality. But will that excuse the princely adept? Notwithstanding the veil artfully thrown over the impious and seditious principles of the sect, did he not begin by swearing obedience and protection to the Order? His court soon swarms with Illuminees; he thinks he reigns over them, but is no [p. 553] more than their stately captive. And should he fall their victim, will it not be said that he met with his just fate? What strange madness can induce Princes to inscribe their names on the registers of secret societies! Have they not duties to fulfill toward the public? On what right can their oaths of submission and protection be grounded, sworn in the recesses of secret Lodges, to men who hide themselves from public view, when their labours, cares, and protecting power, are to extend over the whole state and to all its citizens? On the throne, or with pretensions to it, do they not degradingly swear obedience and protection to Masters of Lodges! By what right, will they promulgate laws emanating from Lodges? When their subjects swore allegiance and fidelity to them, did those subjects expect to be governed by a slave, or be subjected to laws proclaimed indeed by their Prince, but dictated by some Master Illuminee or Rosicrucian? And ye, magistrates of the people, who are to sit in judgment over the mutual and disputed claims of the citizens in general, what confidence can be placed in you after you have sworn obedience and protection to this illuminizing Sect, even in actions just or unjust? Such reflections will rise refulgent from the page of history; and would to God that the Revolution had not already indelibly engraved them! If ever self-love should have directed the actions of men, and supplied the place of nobler motives, the princely dupe will have found ample matter in the laws of Illuminism to stimulate his, when he but casts his eye on the following article contained in the instructions for the Prefects, or local Superiors, under the head formation of pupils: "What will numbers avail us, if unity and similarity of sentiment do not prevail?--No rank, no state of life, can dispense the Brethren from our labours or our trials. To accustom them to despise all distinctions, and to view the world and human nature in the grand scale, the Prefect shall carefully collect all the anecdotes he can, remarkable either for their generosity or meanness, not regarding to whom they relate, whether Princes or Citizens, rich or poor. He will transmit them to the Masters of the Minervals; and these will expose them in a proper manner to their pupils. They will not forget to give the name of the Prince of great personage, though the trait should dishonour him; for," says the Code, "every member must be made sensible, that we distribute impartial justice, and that among us the wicked man upon the throne is called a villain (ein schurke heist) just as freely, if not more so, than the criminal who is being led to the gallows." Under the same head we may observe another article remarkable enough, on the means of rendering the language of the adepts more uniform when speaking before any of the Order, or of facts relating to it. On these occasions the Prefect will take care secretly to instruct the lower Superiors in what stile they are to hold forth, what ideas to propagate, and in what manner they should make their pupils speak. "Hence the pupils will constantly accord themselves in every thing, whether in language or action, with the Superiors, though their motives may be unknown to them. But these means we shall all tend toward the same object; the young adepts will accustom themselves to search and dive into the intentions of the Order; to [p. 554] refrain from acting; or to be silent on all doubtful occasions, till they have received the advice or orders of their Superior as to what they ought to do or say." Under the head Love or Spirit of the Order, the Prefect is instructed, that such Love or Spirit is to be infused by descanting on the beauty and importance of the object of the Sect, the integrity of its members, the greatness and certainty of its means, the utility of the instruction imparted, and security promised to all its pupils by the Order.--This Love will always be proportionate to the certainty of being happy while attached to the Order, and of finding real happiness in no other place. To stimulate it, he must always feed them with the hopes of new discoveries more and more important; and, lest their zeal should diminish, "try to keep our pupils constantly occupied with objects relating to the Order; make it their favourite pursuit.--See what the Roman Catholic Church does to make its religion familiar to its followers, how it keeps their attention incessantly toward it; model yourself by that.--It would be impossible to foresee all cases and lay down rules for them;--Let it then be the constant study of the Prefects and other Superiors to prepare themselves for unforeseen events--Let them propose and distribute prizes for the best compositions on such cases. Perpetual vigilance will render it impossible for the edifice not sooner or later to succeed, and to take a proper consistency according to the local circumstances. Exhort the Brethren to complacency, beneficence, and generosity toward each other and toward the Order." The next article treats of Obedience. Here the Prefect is informed, "That should he have been diligent and successful in impressing the young pupils with the grandeur of the views of the Sect, they will doubtless obey the Superiors with pleasure. How can they do otherwise than submit themselves to be conducted by Superiors who have so carefully guided them hitherto, who contributed so much to their present happiness, and who promise to perpetuate it in future? May the man who is not to be enticed into obedience by such advantages be rejected from among us; let him be cast out from the society of the elect! The spirit of obedience is to be more particularly infused by example and instruction--by the conviction, that to obey our Superiors is in fact only fulfilling our own inclination--by the gradual progress of the degrees--by the hopes of discovering more important truths--by fear properly managed--by honours, rewards, and distinctions granted to the docile--by contempt cast on the stubborn--by avoiding familiarity with the inferiors--by the exemplary punishment of the rebellious--by the selection of those whom we know to be devoted to us and ready to execute all our commands--by a particular attention to the Quibus Licets whereby we may see how far the Orders of the Superiors have been executed;--and by the punctuality of the intermediary Superiors in sending the tablets or reports respecting their inferiors. The more particular those tablets are, the better they will be; for it is on them that all the operations of the Order are grounded. It is by their means that the progress and number of the Brethren are to be known; that the strength or weakness of the machine, and the proportion and adhesion of all its parts are to be calculated, [p. 555] and that the promotion of the Brethren, the merits and demerits of the assemblies, of the Lodges, and of their Superiors, are to be judged. When treating of Secrecy, "The Prefect is informed, that this is the most essential article; and it is on that account that even in countries where the Sect may have acquired sufficient power to throw off its mask, it is to remain veiled in darkness." "The Prefect is always to hide with dexterity the real object of his views according to local circumstances. Let him agree with the Provincial on what shape he shall assume to conceal the Order. As in the religious institutions of the Roman Church, where religion, alas! is but a pretext; exactly so, only in a nobler manner, must we enwrap our Order in the forms of a mercantile society, or some other exterior of a similar nature." In vain would the reader ask me, whence the Illuminized Code had taken the idea of Religion being only a pretext for the religious institutions in the Catholic Church. It has not come to my knowledge, that the most barefaced Sophisters have ever advanced a calumny of this sort. I have seen the religious founders, such as St. Francis, St. Benedict, or St. Basil, and other founders of orders, described by the Sophisters as superstitious enthusiasts. But even among the apostates who must have been acquainted with the Orders they had lived in, we have never heard one pretend that Religion was only a pretext either for the institution they abandoned, or for their ancient brethren. Did any of them ever assert, that ambition, avarice, or any pretext beside Religion, had given rise to the foundation of the Order of the Capuchins, Friars, Benedictines, or Carmelites, and of so many other convents destined for men or women? This, however, is not a calumny originating with Weishaupt; it is not to be found in his instructions sent to Knigge, and on which the latter formed the Code of Laws for the Regents and Local Superiors, though he subjoined many of his own ideas. Knigge was totally ignorant of every thing relating to religious Orders. Weishaupt was born a Roman Catholic, and might indeed, in his impiety, have repeated the ideas of many apostate Sophisters, or have left this strange comparison of his Illuminism with the religious institutes, since it was in the Code: but I should be truly surprized were I to find that it was a Calumny of his invention. He knew too well how much he stood in need of darkness to envelope his designs; and he also knew, that in the Roman Catholic Church no religious institute was adopted, until it had been made public and examined by the constituted authorities. After this absurd calumny follows a recapitulation of every thing we have already exposed to our readers in the first Chapters of this Volume, on the necessity of hiding the proceedings and even the very existence of the Lodges. But I find the following additions in this place. "Lest the number of the Brethren should expose them to discovery, by their assemblies being too numerous, the Prefect will take care that no more than ten members shall assemble in the same Minerval Church." [p. 556] "Should any place contain a greater number of pupils, the Lodges must be multiplied, or different days of assembly must be assigned, that all may not meet at once; and should there be several Minerval Churches in the same town, the Prefect will take care that those of one Lodge shall know nothing of the others." For the better direction of the lower part of the edifice, he will observe the following rules--He is to nominate the Magistrates of the Minervals; but the chief of these Magistrates can only be named with the consent of the Provincial. He will be responsible for those he names.--He will overlook the MASONIC and Minerval Lodges, to see that every thing is regularly and punctually executed. He will not permit any discourses to be delivered there which may give any strong suspicions of what is contriving against Religion, the state, or morals.--He will suffer no Brother to be advanced to the higher degrees before he has acquired the requisite qualities and principles; on this point, says the Code, he cannot carry his precautions, anxiety, and scrupulosity too far. "It has already been stated in the rules, that persons not belonging to the Order may be received into the MASONIC Lodges of Illuminism--The Prefect will carefully watch lest any of these strangers should take the lead in the Lodges.--They should as far as possible be honest men, sedate, and quiet; but by some means or other they should be made useful to the Order.--Without leave of the Provincial, the Prefect shall hold no correspondence on matters relating to the Order with any person out of his province--as his peculiar object will be, to watch over and to instruct the Superiors of the Minerval and MASONIC Lodges, he will have recourse to the Provincial in all doubtful cases of any importance. "Let the Prefect make himself perfect master of these rules; let him follow them with precision; let him always attend to the whole of the object; let him take care that each one may attend to his duty, doing neither more nor less than the law requires; and he will find in this instruction all that is necessary for the regulation of his conduct." Such is the promise which terminates the laws for the Prefect of Illuminism. The five articles treated of in these regulations are prefaced by a far more pompous promise: "If, it is said, we have exactly foreseen every thing relating to these five articles, nothing will be impossible for us in any country under the Sun." [*7] [p. 557] Footnotes ^557:1 Should any adept wish for a specimen of this miserable farce, let him figure to himself an assembly of Epopts in their sacredotal habits. The Delegate opens the piece by Domine aperi os meum: The two Assistants repeat the same--The Plenipotentiary Fili mi quid postulas? The Delegate Ut Deus et Superiores nostri concedant nobis Decanum hunc quem ad te duco.--Plenip. Habetis decretum?--Habemus--Legatur--Communi voto atque consensu superiorum elegimus nobis in Decanum Fratrem N. N. Presbiterum Nostrae Provinciae, Majoris Ordinis verum atque prudentem hospitalem, moribus ornatum, sapientem, illuminatum et mansuetum, Deo et superioribus nostris per omnia placentemque ad Celsitudinis vestrae dignitatem [p. 557] adducere, quatenus autore Domino nobis velut idoneus Decanus prae-esse valeat ut prodesse, nosque sub ejus sapienti regimine in securitate ac quiete magnis scientiis aliisque operibus curare possimus--Plenip. Disposuisti domui tuae?--The Elect Disposui--Nosti quanta sit Decani cura et qua poena infligantur infideles et delatores?--Duce the Domine Ego auctoritate superiorum inductus firmiter sub interminatione anathematis, inhibeo tibi, ne quid de scientiis occultis, vel secreta tibi revelanda abducas, surripias, vel alicui profano communices. Si tu autem aliquid attentare praesumseris, maledictus eris in domo et extra domum, maledictus in civitate et in agro, maledictus vigilando et dormiendo, maledictus manducando et bibendo, maledictus ambulando et sedendo, maledicta erunt caro et ossa, et sanitatem non habebis a planta pedis usque ad verticem. Veniat tunc super te maledictio quam per Moysen in lege filio iniquitatis Dominus promisit. Deleatur nomen tuum in libro viventium, et cum justis non amplius scribatur, fiat pars et hereditas tua cum Cain fratricida, cum Dathan et Abiron, cum Anania et Saphira, cum Simone Mago et Juda proditore. Vide ergo ne quid feceris, quo anathema mereris.--Here follow the imposition of hands, the exhortations, and the benedictions, all in Latin. The Officiator, extending his hands again on the head of the Elect, terminates the ceremony with the following words: Sicut ros Hermon qui descendit in montem Sion, sic desecendat super te Dei summae sapientiae benedictio (see the last works of Spartacus--Nachricht von Weihung eines Decani).--What execrable impiety must the Sect have infused into its Epopts to expect that such an impious derision of the Scriptures and of the most sacred rites could give them pleasure? Let not the reader think that I have exaggerated this barbarous cant. The whole ceremony is a buffoonery of the lowest class. Impiety depraves every thing, even the taste for literature. ^557:2 Instructions C for the Regents, and No. I-X. ^557:3 Kann der Prafect die furstlichen Dicasterien und Rathe nach und nach mit eifrigen ordens mitgliedern besetzen, so hat er alles gethan, was er thun konte. Es ist mehr, als wenn er den fursten selbst aufgenommen hatte. ^557:4 Orig. Writ. Vol. II. 2d Jan. 1785. ^557:5 Ibid.--Weishaupt's Let. 15th March, 1781. ^557:6 Geschichte der illumin. Grad. Page 66. ^557:7 Ist nun in diessen funf stucken alles gehorig besorgt, so ist in iedem lande unter der sonne nichts unmoglich--The whole of this Chapter is extracted from the Instructions C for the Prefect, from Page 145 to 166. Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford [1798], at sacred-texts.com [p. 558] CHAP. XVII. Instructions for the Provincial. BY far the greater part of the code of laws which has just been laid before the reader as relating to the Regents and Prefects of the Illuminees, was originally written by Weishaupt for the instruction of his Provincials. This is evident from the first digest of these laws, as they appear in the second part of the second volume of the Original Writings of the Sect, from page 17 to 43. It is even one of those parts which Knigge looked upon as a master-piece of politics. [*1] So replete with artifice did he think it, that he deemed it a pity to circumscribe the knowledge of it to the Provincials alone. The reader has seen what use he has made of them, thoroughly persuaded that the Regents in general, and particularly the Local Superiors, could greatly benefit the Order by attending to them. The Areopagites and General consented to these new dispositions; but the following part of this chapter remained appropriated to the Provincials. "I. The Provincial shall make himself perfect master of the whole constitution of the Order. The system of it should be as familiar to him as if he had invented it." "II. As a guide for all his actions, he shall adopt the whole government and the instructions already laid down for the Regents and Local Superiors, not neglecting a single rule. " "III. The Provincial shall be chosen by the Regents of his Province, and be confirmed by the National Superior. . . . [*2] The high Superiors (the Areopage and General) have the power of deposing him." "IV. He shall be a native of, or at least be thoroughly acquainted with the province under his inspection." "V. He shall be as little as possible in public concerns, or in any other enterprize, that he may devote all his time to the Order." "VI. He shall assume the character of a man retired from the world, and who only seeks rest." "VII. He shall fix his residence as nearly as possible in the centre of his province, the better to watch over the different districts." "VIII. On his being named Provincial, he shall leave his former characteristic, and assume that which the high Superiors shall give him.--The [p. 559] same Superiors will send him the impression of the seal he is to bear, and he will wear it engraved on his ring." "IX. The archives of the province, which the Regents will have taken care to seal up and carry away on the demise of his predecessor, are to be entrusted to him on his nomination." "X. The Provincial will monthly transmit the general report of his province to the National Inspector immediately over him. As he himself only receives the reports of the Local Superiors a fortnight after the month is up, he will necessarily be always a month behind-hand, making, for example, the report of May about the end of June, and so on. This report will be subdivided into as many parts as he has Prefects under his inspection. He will carefully note every thing of consequence that has happened in any of the schools or lodges: also the names, ages, country, station in life, and the date of the reversal letters, of each new adept; the high Superiors wishing to have no further information concerning the new adepts until they come to the class of Regent, unless on some particular occasion." "XI. Beside this monthly report, he is to apply to the National Superior in all extraordinary cases which are not left to his decision. He is also to send in his personal tablets every three months; and he will undertake no political enterprize without having first consulted." "XII. He has nothing to do with the other Provincials. Let things go on well or ill in a neighbouring province, it is no business of his. If he wishes to ask any thing of the other Provincials, let him apply to the National Inspector." "XIII. If he has any complaint to make against the Inspector, he will direct his letter Soli or Primo." "XIV. All the Regents of the province are his counsellors; they are to second and help him in all his enterprizes. If it be convenient to him, he should have two of them near his person to serve him as secretaries." "XV. He confirms the nominations of all the Superiors of the inferior degrees. He also names the Prefects, but they must be approved by the Director, who can refuse his sanction." "XVI. He has a right to send the brethren who are pensioned by the Order, and to employ them in those parts of the province where he may think them most useful." "XVII and XVIII. He transmits the characteristics of the brethren and geographical names of the lodges to the Prefects, as he receives them from the high Superiors." "XIX. He is also to send the names of the excluded brethren, that an exact list may be preserved in all the assemblies." "XX. When he has any reprimand to make to a Brother, whom it may be dangerous to offend, he will assume an unknown hand, and the signature of Basyle. This name, which no member of the Order bears, is peculiarly preserved for that object. [p. 560] "XXI. He will sometimes write to the Inferior degrees; and on the proposition of the Epopts he will decide what books are to be put into the hands of the young adepts according to the degrees they are in.--He is as much as possible to promote libraries, cabinets of natural philosophy, Musaeums, collections of manuscripts, &c. in the most convenient parts of his Province; these, it may easily be conceived, are only intended for the adepts. "XXII. The Provincial opens the letters of the Minor and Major Illuminees which are directed Soli. He also reads the Quibus Licets of the Epopts and Primos of the Novices; but can neither open the Primo of the Minerval, the Soli of the Knight, nor the Quibus Licet of the Regent." [*3] This gradual power of opening the letters of the Brethren according to the degree they belong to, plainly indicates that some mark peculiar to each degree is made use of; but I have not been able to discover that mark. The reader will have observed, that all the letters, even the Quibus Licets, are opened by Brethren of a higher degree than that of the adept who writes; and consequently he can never know who it is that answers him, as the rules of this Hierarchy are only made known to the Brethren in proportion as they rise in dignity. The Provincial himself can only form a conjecture as to the persons who open his letters and those of the other Brethren which he is not permitted to open himself. "XXIII. He shall raise no Brother to the degree of Regent, without having first obtained the consent of the National Inspector. "XXIV. He is to inform the Dean of the branch of science which each new adept has made choice of on his admission into the Minerval Academy. "XXV. Lest any of the Archives should be mislaid, he will take care to form but one bundle of all the tablets, reversal letters, and other documents relating to the same adept. "XXVI. He will apply himself to procure as many co-operators as possible for the Order, in the scientific branches. "XXVII. He will transmit to the Deans all remarkable treatises or discourses, and every thing relative to the degree of Epopt; for example, the lives historical or characteristic, dissertations, &c. "XXVIII. If among the Epopts any men be found endowed with great talents, but little fitted for the political government of the Order, the Provincial must devise means of removing them from such functions. "XXIX. When the Chapters of the Scotch Knights are composed of more than twelve Knights, he will raise the ablest among them to the degree of Epopt. "XXX. In each Chapter he will have a confidential Epopt, who will be his secret censor or spy. "XXXI. The Provincial will receive his letters patent from the National Superior--When he issues those for the Chapters of the Scotch Knights, he will make use of the following formula: 'We of the Grand Lodge of the Germanic Orient, constituted Provincial and Master of the district of N N, make known that by these presents we give to the venerable Brother (here is the characteristic and true name of the new Venerable or Master) full powers to [p. 561] erect a secret Chapter of the most holy SCOTCH MASONRY, and to propagate this Royal Art conformably to his instructions by the establishment of new Masonic Lodges of the three symbolic degrees--Given at the Directory of the District-- (L. S.) SECRET PROVINCIAL OF THE DIRECTORY. without any further signature. "XXXII. To say every thing in a few words, the Provincial has the special charge of putting his province in a proper situation for attempting every thing for the general good, and for preventing all evil.--Happy the state where our Order shall have acquired such power! Nor will it prove a difficult task for the Provincial who shall implicitly follow the instructions of his high Superiors.--Seconded by so many able men deeply versed in moral sciences, submissive and secretly labouring like himself, there can be no noble enterprize which he may not undertake, nor evil design which he cannot avert--Therefore let there be no connivance at faults; no Nepotism, no private piques; no views but for the general good; no object, no motives but those of the Order. And let the Brethren rely upon us, that we shall never create any Provincials but such as are capable of fulfilling these duties; but let it be also remembered, that we reserve in our hands all the means necessary for chastising the man who should presume to abuse the power he has received from us." [*4] "XXXIII. This power must never be employed but for the good of the Brethren. We should indeed help all whom we can help; but when the circumstances are similar, the members of our society are always to have the preference.--Particularly as to those whose fidelity is proof against all the powers of seduction. In their support let us be prodigal of our toils, our money, our honour, our goods, even our blood; and let the least affront offered to any Illuminee be the general cause of the Order." Thus terminate the instructions for the Provincial. They forewarn us of the existence of a most tremendous power above him whence all the authority of the Order emanates; a power which reserves to itself the means of chastising whoever shall abuse that portion which it has entrusted to any of its adepts; that is to say, who shall not have made it subservient to the grand object and to all the plots of the Sect.--There are, in fact, three offices in the hierarchal Orders of Superiors above the Provincial. First, the National Directors, then the Supreme Council called the Areopagites by the Sect, the authority of which extends over the of all nations; and that is presided over by the General of the Order. The following Chapter will give every light on these supreme Magistrates of Illuminism which the known Archives of the Sect can reflect. [p. 562] Footnotes ^562:1 See his last Observations. ^562:2 There is an omission in the copy from which these rules have been printed, which makes part of this article unintelligible. [p. 562] ^562:3 This article is extracted from the instructions for the Prefect; but, being directly addressed to the Provincial, I have placed it here. ^562:4 See the Instruction D for the degree of Regent. Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford [1798], at sacred-texts.com [p. 563] CHAP. XVIII. Of the National Directors, of the Areopagites, and of the General of Illuminism. IN the general plan of the Government of the Illuminees it is said, that every Brother shall receive particular instructions according to the rank he holds in the Hierarchy of the Order: Yet I have never been able to discover those intended for the use of the National Directors. This part of the Code is not to be found either in the two volumes so often quoted of the Original Writings, or in that of Philo and Spartacus which has thrown so much light on the mysteries. It does not appear, that any of the German writers who have been the best informed on, and the most strenuous opponents of, Illuminism have ever been able to discover them. For some time I even entertained doubts whether the Superiors called National Directors, and those styled Inspectors, were not of the same degree in the Hierarchy of the Sect.--They were certainly distinct employments in the year 1782; for Weishaupt's letters at that period mention Germany as divided into three inspections, each Inspector having several Provincials subordinate to him. [*1] But, on the other side, the general account which the Order puts into the hands of its Regents, and the last works of Philo printed in 1788, mention no intermediate office between the Provincials and the Nationals, which latter are sometimes described as National Superiors, at others as National Inspectors. Their correspondence and subordination is direct from the Supreme Council. [*2] It is therefore evident, that in the last digest of the Code the two offices of National Inspector and Director were united. But in vain would the Sect conceal the instructions which it has appropriated to the functions of these National Superiors. The denomination alone testifies the importance which attaches to their office; and if the precise nature of their duties be wanting, it is easy to supply the deficiency, by what has already escaped the vigilance of the Sect in the foregoing parts of the Code. Let the reader recall to his mind what has been said in the Chapter on the Epopts, of the systems which they were to form in order to seize on the empire of the Sciences and direct them all toward the accomplishment of the plots of the Sect. In the same degree we have seen them annually assembling in each province, and compiling from their partial attacks every means that their inventions could furnish, insensibly to enslave the public opinion, and to [p. 564] eradicate from the minds of the people what the Sect is pleased to call religious prejudices. We have seen the class of Regents more particularly occupied in sapping the foundations of the throne, and in destroying that veneration in which nations held the persons and functions of their Sovereigns--Nay, there exists a particular law framed for the Epopts which has not yet been cited, and which must here be introduced. It is to be found in the Second Volume of the Original Writings, second Section, intitled--Articles agreed upon by the Areopagites in Ardameth 1151 (A.D. December 1781)--There under the article HIGH MYSTERIES, I read, "If among our Epopts any speculative geniuses are to be found, they shall be admitted to the degree of Mage.--These adepts shall be employed in collecting and digesting all the grand philosophical systems, and will invent or compile for the people a system of religion which our Order means as soon as possible to give to the universe." [*3] I do not forget that I am to treat of the National Directors; but am somewhat afraid that my readers may adduce this plan for giving a new religion to the whole universe, as invalidating their plot for the destruction of every religion. Let such readers, however, reflect on the religion which Weishaupt has himself laid down for his Mages. It is the rankest Spinosism, admitting of no God but the world itself; that is to say, absolute Atheism. Let them also remember, that one of the last secrets of the Grand Mysteries, is to reveal to the adepts that all religions are grounded on and are the invention of imposture. Nor is it by any means difficult to account for these two schemes of the Sect, the one for the creation of a new religion, the other for the destruction of all. These plans are to be successive in their operations. Sentiments of Religion are too deeply engraven in the minds of the people for Weishaupt to flatter himself with suddenly eradicating it, or at least without substituting some capricious and sophisticated faith, which in reality would no more constitute a religion than the Worship of Reason, of which the French Revolution has given us an impure essay. The religion, therefore, to be invented by the Mages of Illuminism is no more than a preparatory step that should destroy the religion of Christ throughout the universe. This advantage gained, it will remain no very difficult task to open the eyes of the whole world on the inanity and imposture of their own; and thus it will have served as a scaffolding which naturally disappears with the edifice that is to be pulled down. This religion to be invented may be considered as on a parallel with those new governments, those democracies, which are to amuse the people until the period shall come when their Illuminizing Equality and Liberty shall have taught them, that each one is essentially his own sovereign, that this sovereignty is an imprescriptible right inherent in each man, in direct opposition to democracy, and even to all property or social compact. Such is the general tenour of the systems to be invented and prosecuted by the Sect, for attaining the grand object of these Conspirators. All the adepts which the Sect comprises under the denomination of speculative geniuses are perpetually labouring at these systems under the direction of the Provincials. But they are not the persons who complete the plans; they are only to present [p. 565] the first sketch, which each Provincial is obliged to transmit to the National Directory, there to undergo a further investigation and receive its final polish. [*4] One of the first duties, therefore, of the National Director will be to collect all these anti-religious and anti-social systems, to pass judgment on them, and to declare how far they can contribute towards the universal disorganization. But even these could not alone suffice for so great a work; they are surrounded by the Elect of the nation as the Provincial is by the Chosen of the provinces. This council of the Elect, after mature deliberation, declare which are the systems that are worthy of being adopted by the Order; and they will make all the additions and corrections that they may conceive conducive to the success of the general plan. Thus corrected and digested, these systems of impiety and disorganization are deposited in the archives of the Director, which now become national. It is to these that the Provincials have recourse in all their doubts, and hence flow all those lights which are to expand themselves throughout the nation:--it is hence also that the National Director [*5] will take all the new regulations which he may judge necessary for the better combination and concordance of the efforts of the National Brethren.--But the Sect does not confine its views to one nation. It has formed within itself a supreme tribunal, which has subjected all nations to its inquisition. Composed of twelve Peers or Fathers of the Order, [*6] it is presided over by the General; and, under the name of Areopagites, it becomes the common centre of communication from the adepts of all nations, as the National is the centre of one particular nation, the Provincial of one province, the Local Superior of the lodges of his district, the Minerval Master of his academy, the Venerable of his Masonic Lodge; and, finally, as the Insinuator or Recruiter is of his novices or candidates. Thus, from the first step to the pinnacle of the Order, every thing is connected and gradually ascends by means of the Quibus Licets, Solis and Primos.--Every thing that happens in each nation gradually ascends to the National, and from these Directors all is transmitted to the centre of all nations, to the supreme council of the Areopagites, and the General in chief, the universal Director of the Conspiracy. The grand point, therefore, to be observed in the code concerning the National Director is, his direct correspondence with the Areopagites. It is evident from the terms expressed in the general plan of the government which the Sect reveals to its Regents. "In every nation there shall be a National Director associated and in direct communication with our Fathers, the first of whom holds the helm of the Order." [*7] This accounts for the injunction given to the Provincial, to make frequent and exact returns to the National Director of every thing that may take place in his province; to have recourse to him on all doubtful occasions, or in cases of especial importance; and never to take any step in politics without having first consulted him. [*8] This explains why the choice of those adepts which are to be advanced to the political degree of Regent, or to the Prefectships of districts, [*9] is left to the option of the National, or even the nomination of the Provincials. [*10] This informs us why all the Quibus Licets of the Regents are reserved to the Director, that is to say, [p. 566] that all the secrets of their political discoveries may more certainly reach the hands of him who is to leave no secret hidden from the Fathers of the Order. [*11] Such then are the rights of, such the laws for the National Inspector of Illuminism; and so great is the importance which the Sect attaches to this office. To him are forwarded all the secrets of the brethren spread throughout the provinces, the Courts, or towns; to him are sent all the projects, all the reports on the successes gained by, or dangers impending over the Order; on the progress of its plots; on employments, dignities, and power to be acquired for the adepts; on the candidates to be rejected, the enemies to be crushed, the councils and state offices of princes to be seized. To him, in short, are reported all the means which can retard or accelerate the fall of the Altar and of empires, the disorganization of every church and state within his inspection.--It is by means of his direct correspondence, and that of his Co-nationals, that the discoveries of the Scrutators, the political plans of the Brethren, the speculations of the plodding geniuses of the Order, the plans proposed and debated in the councils of Princes, and every thing, in short, which can weaken or strengthen the opinion of the people; which is to be foreseen or hindered, to be anticipated or hastened in each town, court, or family, are concentrated, and subjected to the views of the supreme council of the Sect. Hence no sovereign, no minister of state, no father of a family, no man in the bonds of the most intimate friendship, can say, My secret is my own, it has not, it will not, come to the knowledge of the Areopagites. By means of these same National Directors too, we behold all the orders of the Illuminizing Peers gradually descending to the adepts of all nations, of all provinces, academies, and lodges, whether Minerval or MASONIC; and immediately re-ascending through these same Nationals an exact statement to the Areopagites in what manner each command has been executed. It is by the Nationals too, that the supreme council is informed of the negligent Brethren who need to be stimulated, of the transgressors and stubborn adepts who deserve punishment, and stand in need of being reminded that they have sworn to submit both their lives and fortunes to the commands of the high Superiors (the unknown Fathers) of the Areopagites. In vain would the Sect strive to conceal the laws which the code lays down for these Inspectors. After what the reader has already seen of the laws of the Order, he must naturally conclude that such are evidently the mysteries comprehended in those words, There shall be in each empire a National Director associated or in direct correspondence with the Fathers of the Order. With to the laws and interior economy of the councils, it is easy to be conceived, that the Sect has succeeded in encompassing them with impenetrable darkness. Some few rays of light, however, have been cast on it, and that by the Fathers themselves. In the first place, we see Philo-Knigge, in his Apology, speaking as follows of these supreme magistrates of Illuminism: "Their labours, with regard to the parts purely speculative, were to have in view the knowledge and the [p. 567] tradition of all the important, holy, and sublime discoveries to be made in the religious mysteries and in the higher philosophy. Twelve Areopagites only are to compose this tribunal; and one of them is to be the chief. When any one of the members dies, or retires, his successor is chosen from among the Regents." [*12] This general idea given by Knigge of the Supreme Council is indeed mysterious;--but he could scarcely be expected to publish more, knowing as he did the fate which awaits those who betray the secrets of the Sect. He has, however, at least said enough to give us clearly to understand, that all the religious and philosophical or rather impious and sophisticated speculations of the Epopts, perpetually perverting the sciences and operating the extinction of all religious ideas, are concentrated within the council of the Areopagites; we have seen them combining, digesting, approving, or rejecting those plans of a new religion which the Mages are directed to invent, and which the Sect means incontinently to give to the world. In his familiar correspondence, Spartacus speaks more openly and with greater latitude to his beloved Cato. Therein it appears, that anti-religious systems do not alone employ the meditations of the Fathers; for, soon after having mentioned the object of those Quibus Licets in the young adepts were to give an account of the prejudices they might have discovered in themselves, which of them predominated, and how far they had succeeded in destroying them, he proceeds to say, "It is by these means that I discover such of our Order as have the proper dispositions for adopting certain special doctrines, and more elevated, on governments and religious opinions." [*13] He then continues, "The maxims and politics of the Order are completely explained in the end. Here, in the Supreme Council, they project and examine the plans to be adopted for gradually enabling us to attack the enemy of reason and human nature personally (auf den leib). Here also the mode of introducing such plans into the Order is discussed, and it is decided to which brethren they are to be entrusted, and how far each one can be employed in their execution, in proportion to the insight given to him." [*14] The reader is already too well acquainted with the maxims and policy of Illuminism, not to join with me in saying, Here then is the grand object of this Supreme Council of the Sect! It is in that dark recess that all those artifices are devised for rendering the disorganizing systems of Equality and Liberty familiar to the Illuminizing adepts: There is exactly ascertained the proportion which each class of the Brethren can bear in this universal destruction of religion, , society, and property; there again is the day anxiously sought and the means prepared, for hereafter throwing off the mask, and attacking personally the defenders of religion, laws, and property, as so many enemies to reason and humanity; there concentrate all the declarations, the reports, the plans of all the brethren dispersed throughout the universe, that the Sect may judge of its own strength, and compare it with that of the friends to the Altar and the Laws. To sum up all, it is there that the artifices and means are determined on, and the merits and powers of the higher adepts are investigated prior to their being entrusted with that part of the grand conspiracy to which [p. 568] their abilities are best adapted. Let the reader remember, that it is not a stranger to the Sect who has thus described the Areopage; it is the grand Legislator of Illuminism himself. Can we any longer stand in need of the regulations for this council? No; we well know what they must be; we know that impiety, and the most consummate arts in seduction and sedition, are to be their leading features; we further know, that its members must resemble Weishaupt himself, before they can be permitted to sit with him in council. What other bond of union do they need, beside the machination of the most hideous plots, the just or unjust means of forwarding the interests of the Sect as much as circumstances will permit, and the ensuring of success by the blackest and most profound artifices that depravity can invent? The fertile genius of the Legislator, however, would not commit the success of the least of his crimes to chance. He attempted to sketch a code of laws for his Areopagites, and for any future Spartacus that might succeed him. The code contains but a sketch of what he calls laws ad interim. It is to be found in the ninth section of the first volume of the Original Writings, and is addressed to the Areopagites. Many other passages of his letters relate to the same object.--I have transcribed the following articles: "The Areopagites shall form the Supreme Council (literally, the Supreme College).--Their occupations shall relate to affairs of the greatest importance, and they shall pay little or no attention to such as are less essential.--They may recruit, it is true (konnen sie zwar recroutiren); that is to say, they may entice Candidates into the Order; but they must leave the care of their instruction to some intelligent adept. From time to time they will visit these Candidates, to inspire them with fresh ardour, to stimulate their zeal--They will be particularly careful in seeing that the progress and method of our Illuminees is every where uniform--They will more particularly watch over Athens (Munich, the principal Lodge after that of Ingolstadt, where Weishaupt resided at the time he wrote these instructions). They will make no reports concerning that Lodge to any body but Spartacus. They will send monthly a statement of all the principal events, a sort of Gazette (Ein art von Zeitung), to the Brethren (Conscii); that is to say, to those only who are initiated in the last secrets. But (continues Weishaupt) nota bene, this Gazette as yet has been no more than our common journal; the Conscii must compose one for the use of the Areopagites. These latter will labour at projects, ameliorations, and other objects of a similar nature, which are to be made known to the Conscii by circular letters. They are the people who are to bear a part of the weight of the general correspondence--They are not allowed to open the letters of complaint (die litteras gravatoriales); that is to say, those containing any complaints against them. These are to be transmitted to the general, to Spartacus, as a sure means of informing him that they fulfil their duty. This instruction being only provisional, and relating solely to the Areopage, shall not be circulated; but the council will take a copy and send back the Original to Spartacus. [*15] "The assembling of the council is to be regulated according to the feasts marked in the calendar of the Order. (Nach dem calendario Illuminatorum an [p. 569] [paragraph continues] Ordens festen)." But this was soon found to be insufficient, and Weishaupt exhorts his Areopagites to meet in their senate every post-day, and at the hour of the delivery of the letters. Short as this sketch of a Code for the Areopagites may seem, it clearly denotes the essence of their functions, and shows how they are to act as a central point for the whole Sect. A grand question was still undecided when Spartacus gave these laws to the council; which was nothing less than, Whether Spartacus was to preserve a legislative and sovereign power over the Members of this Council, similar to that authority which they were to exercise over the rest of the Order?--Great Conspirators will seldom brook control even by their fellows. They will be equal among themselves and in their dens of conspiracy. Spartacus-Weishaupt was naturally of a despotic disposition. His Areopagites for a long time complained of it. [*16] But he contended, that as founder, he had the indefeasible right of giving to the association those laws and regulations which he judged necesssary for its perpetuation. He soon, indeed, repented of the decision he had given against himself in favour of his Senate, "That the plurality of votes should dictate the eternal laws of the Sect" (Lex semper valitura) [*17] Notwithstanding these complaints of the Areopagites, however, he speedily found means of re-instating himself in that authority, the privation of which only thwarted his artful conceptions, by subjecting them to the opinions of persons less consummate in the conspiring arts than their master. He sometimes submits to the justification of his conduct; but that is the very moment in which the reader should observe him artfully reclaiming all the rights and pretending to the exercise of unlimited despotism, though his cant appears to reject the very idea of it. Addressing his opponents in the shape of his pupils, he recalls to their minds the monstrous services he has rendered them in their youth, as so many benefactions of the most tender friendship, and asks them "of what they can in their consciences complain?" "When (says he) did you ever observe harshness or haughtiness in my conduct, with respect to you? When did I ever assume the tone of Master? Is it not rather with an excess of confidence, of goodness, of openess with my friends, that I may be reproached?"--When in this manner Weishaupt has captivated his Areopagites, he comes to the point: "Read then (he says) my letters over and over again. You will therein perceive that the grand object of our Society is not a thing of small consequence for me; that I know how to view it, and treat it also, in the most serious manner; that I have always aimed at the establishment of order, submission, discipline, and activity, as the sole means that can lead you to the grand object. In undertaking a work of such vast importance, was I not obliged by prayers, exhortations, and advice, to maintain and stimulate the ardour of my first, my dearest companions, on whom every thing depended?--If I wish to keep the supreme direction in my own hands, hear my reasons, which are most certainly of great weight: "In the first place, I must necesssarily know with whom I have to deal, and must be ascertained of the fidelity of our people; and, to effectuate this, I am not to receive reports from a sixth hand, or perhaps one still more [p. 570] remote, on the execution of my plans, which have been approved of by the Elect of our Mysteries. . . In the next place, am I not the Constructor of this grand Edifice? Is there no respect due to me?. . . . When my system shall be completed, will it not be necessary for me to inspect the whole, and keep every man at his station? It is a great and radical defect in a society, where a Superior is dependent on the Inferiors, as it has been attempted to render me. "But, to show you how much I value the friendship of my former friends, above all the authority I may exercise over others, I renounce all my rights, all my authority. Accept my warmest acknowledgements for all your past labours and patience. I flatter myself they have been hurtful to nobody, and that many have acquired from me lights on secret societies which they would not easily have found elsewhere. The purity of my intentions is my consolation and my recompense. From this instant I betake myself to obscurity and repose, where I shall not meet with zealous and envious opponents. There I shall be my own master, and my own subject." [*18] The Illuminizing Despot thus artfully pleaded his cause. The Areopagites were impatient of his authority, but at the same time felt the want of so disorganizing a genius; and that they might not be deprived of its co-operation they reproached the Legislator with the extinction of his zeal.--The fire, however, was only hidden beneath the embers; they once more submit to the yoke of their former chief, who, inflamed with zeal, dictates the conditions on which alone he will deign to place himself once more at their head. Every thing is worthy of being remarked in them. The haughty spirit in which they are conceived, the nature, object, and extent of the power he assumes over the Supreme Council and Elect of the Order, are all worthy of our attentive notice. "I begin (says he) by telling you before hand, that it may not any more be a subject of surprize, that I will be more severe than ever. I will not overlook a single fault, and shall in that respect be much more strict toward persons whom I know rather than toward those with whom I am not so familiar. My object and views require it. And to whom would you have me address myself, if not to the chiefs of the Order, since they alone are in direct correspondence with me? That things may succeed, it is necessary that we should be actuated but by one opinion, one sentiment, and be acquainted but with one language! And how can this be accomplished, if I cannot freely speak my mind to our people? I will then re-assume my post of General on the following conditions: "I. That you will execute neither more nor less than what I shall command. I shall expect it in future; at least, should any change be thought necessary, I am to receive previous notice of it. "II. I expect that every Saturday a proper report shall be sent to me of every thing that has taken place during the week, and that it shall be in the form of Minutes signed by all the Elect present. "III. That I shall be informed of all the Members that have been recruited, or persons that are to be recruited, with an outline of their [p. 571] characters; and let some particulars concerning them be added when they are admitted. "IV. That the statutes of the class in which you labour be punctually observed, and that no be granted without previous investigation. For should each one take upon himself to make such changes as he pleased, where would be the unity of the Order.--What I exact from you, you shall exact from those that are subject to you. If there be no order and subordination in the higher ranks, there will be none in the lower." [*19] It was on the 25th of May 1779, that Weishaupt dictated these laws to his Areopage. A fifth condition seems to have made them merely provisional, and to have entrusted the despotic power in Weishaupt's hand only until the order had acquired a proper consistency; but he took care not again to lose the newly-acquired supremacy; though the Areopagites still regretted the loss of their Aristocracy, and the being reduced to be the mere agents or prime ministers of the Spartacus of the Order. But let us attend to that Spartacus, who has always represented the most legitimate authority as an outrage on human nature. Let us hear him invoking Machiavel in support of that which he wishes to exercise over the Order. He pleads his own cause with Zwack, who is also jealous of his Master, by showing all the disorder it occasioned, by every body wishing to introduce his own ideas into the Order, and then quotes the following passages from Machiavel: "It must be laid down as a general rule, that it seldom or never happens that any Government is either well-founded at first, or thoroughly reformed afterwards, except the plan be laid and conducted by ONE MAN ONLY, who has the sole power of giving all orders and making all laws that are for its establishment. A prudent and virtuous Founder of a State, therefore, whose chief aim is to promote the welfare of many rather than to gratify his own ambition, to make provision for the good of his country, in preference to that of his heirs or successors, ought to endeavour by all means to get the supreme authority wholly into his hands: nor will a reasonable man ever condemn him for taking any measures (even the most extraordinary, if they are necessary) for that purpose: The means indeed may seem culpable, but the end will justify him if it be a good one;--for he only is blameable who uses violence to throw things into confusion and distraction; and not he who does it to peace and good Order." After this long quotation which Weishaupt has made from a French of Machiavel, Chap. IX. Discourses upon the first Decad of Livy, he continues in a sorrowful tone: "but I have not been able to obtain so favourable a decision. The Brethren have viewed that which is but a necessary law in the art of governing, in the light of ambition and a thirst of dominion." [*20] In the midst of this contention for power, he felt himself so superior in the art of governing conspiring associations at least, that he did not hesitate at writing to his Areopagites, As to politics and morality, Gentlemen, you must confess that you are as yet at a great distance behind me. [*21] He at length succeeded in persuading them, that it was necessary that the General of the Order should also, as [p. 572] president of the Areopagites holding the helm of the Order, be the absolute director. [*22] Weishaupt, who left nothing relating to the disorganizing arts in an imperfect state, must, no doubt, have composed instructions to guide his successors in the exercise of their supremacy, and to teach them how to make the same use of it which he intended. But the reader will easily conceive, that these never could have escaped the vigilance of the Sect, nor pierced the dark cloud with which it had enveloped itself. It may even be possible that Weishaupt had not sufficient confidence in his Areopagites to entrust them with the entire plan. Throughout the whole hierarchy of Illuminism the lower degree is entirely ignorant of the particular instructions of the superior degrees; and why should not Weishaupt, who wished to perpetuate his disorganizing genius in all the succeeding Generals, have followed the same plan? He undoubtedly dictated laws and rules for their conduct, gave them rights which were to maintain both themselves and their Areopagites in their hierarchical superiority, and second them in the pursuit of their grand object; and these were entitled Instructions for the General of the Illuminees. No historian can flatter himself with the discovery of such a code of artifice and cunning; the most unrelenting wickedness and hypocrisy had invented it; and genius alone can pretend to dive into such secrets. The historian can only pretend to collect those articles which are to be found in Weishaupt's familiar correspondence, or in other parts of the code or writings of the Sect. Were we to throw this compilation into the form of instructions, the following might be nearly the result of our research. I. The General shall be chosen by the twelve Peers of the Areopage, on the plurality of votes. [*23] II. The Areopagites can only elect one of the members of their senate for General; (ein aus ihrher mitte gewahltes oberhaupt); [*24] that is to say, a man who has sufficiently distinguished himself among the Regents to be admitted among the twelve supreme adepts of Illuminism, and who has afterwards made himself so eminent in their council, that he is judged to be the first Illuminee in the world. III. The adept is supposed to possess qualities requisite for a General in consequence of those he may have evinced before he was called to the Supreme Council. As he is to preside over the whole Order, he must (more than any body else) be impressed with the principles of the founder, and be divested of all religious, political, or national prejudices. The grand object of the Order must be more particularly inculcated into him, namely, that of teaching the whole universe to set aside all government, laws, and altars; and he must perpetually attend to the grand interests of human nature. His zeal is to be stimulated at the sight of every man who is subjected to any authority. It is to reinstate the inhabitants of the earth in their original Equality and Liberty that he is constituted General of all the Illuminees that are or will be spread over the world during his reign, all labouring at the accomplishment of the grand revolution of the Man-King. [*25] [p. 573] IV. The General shall have immediately under him the twelve Peers of the Supreme Council, and the various agents and secretaries which he shall judge necesssary to second him in the exercise of his functions. [*26] V. The better to secure himself from the notice of the civil and ecclesiastical powers, he may assume, after the example of the founder, some public office under the very Powers the annihilation of which is to be his sole object. But he will be only known to the Areopagites and to his agents and secretaries in his quality of General. [*27] The better to conceal the residence of the General, the town where he has fixed will have three names. The common name known to all; the geographical one peculiar to the Order; and a third known only to the Areopagites and the Conscii or Elect. [*28] VI. Our success greatly depending on the moral conduct of the Areopagites, the General will pay particular attention to prevent all public scandals which might hurt the reputation of the Order. He will represent to them in the strongest colours how much bad example will contribute to alienate from the Order the kinds of persons who might otherwise prove its most useful members. [*29] VII. The better to preserve that respect which virtue commands from inferiors, the General will assume the character of austere morals. That he may always have the grand object present to his mind, and be wholly occupied with the duties he has to fulfil; let him never lose sight of that great maxim so frequently inculcated in his letters by the founder, as the leading feature to which he owed all his successes. Multum sudavit et alsit, abstinuit venere et vino. He neither feared heat nor cold; he abstained from wine and women, that he might always be master of his secret, always be master of himself, and prepared for all exigencies where the interests of the Order might require it. [*30] VIII. The General shall be the central point for the Areopagites, as the latter are for the whole body of Illuminees. That is to say, each Areopagite holding correspondence with the National Inspectors is to make a report of all the Quibus Licets sent, and of all the secrets discovered by the corresponding Inspector; the secrets thus flowing from all parts will ultimately settle under the eye of the General. [*31] IX. The functions of the General, and the success of his dispositions, greatly depending on the information he receives by means of this correspondence, he will distribute it among his Areopagites, assigning to each that of a particular nation whose Inspector is to transmit all his reports to him. [*32] X. The principal heads of this correspondence shall be--1st, The number of the brethren in general, that the force of the Sect may be ascertained in each nation.--2dly, Those brethren who distinguish themselves the most by their zeal and intelligence--3dly, Those adepts who hold important offices about the Court, in the Church, Armies, or Magistracy: also what kinds of services might be expected from or prescribed to them in the grand revolution which our Order was preparing for human nature.--4thly, The general progress which our maxims and our doctrine were making in the public opinion; how far nations were prepared for the grand revolution; what [p. 574] strength and means of defence still remained in the hands of the civil and powers; what persons were to be placed or displaced; what engines were to be played off, to hasten and secure the success of our revolution; and the means necessary to bind the hands of those who might resist. [*33] XI. If from this correspondence he should judge it necesssary to dismiss any of the brethren from the Order, (and all the rights recognized by the adepts as inherent in the Order, particularly that of Life and Death being in the hands of the General) he will have to decide what further punishment is to follow the ejectment: whether the culprit is to be declared infamous throughout all the lodges of the Order, or whether the pain of death is to be pronounced against him. [*34] XII. The General, after having chastised the imprudent, cowardly, and treacherous adepts, will turn his attention toward the discovery of those brethren who may be best fitted for seconding his views in each empire. Without making himself known to them, he will establish a line of communication between them. He will himself prepare the links of this immense chain after the manner laid down by our founder as the grand means of governing, from his mysterious centre, all the diverging ramifications of the Sect to the extremities of the earth; as a means of vivifying invisible armies in an instant, of putting them in motion, of directing their course, and of irretrievably executing the most astonishing revolutions, even before the very Potentates whose thrones are overturned have had time to surmise their danger. XIII. The use of the chain is obvious and easy. To touch the fist link is all that is required. A single stroke of a pen is the grand spring that imparts motion to the whole. But the success depends on the choice of the time. In his hidden abode the General shall the means, and catch the propitious moment. The signal of universal revolution shall not be given till a time when the combined force and instantaneous efforts of the brethren shall be irresistible. The illuminizing General who shall have managed this chain with the greatest art, who shall have spread it both far and near, who shall have imparted to it a sufficient power of action to bear away and overturn at a single effort every throne and every altar, all political and religious institutions, and shall strew the earth with the ruins of empires--He will be the creator of the Man-King, sole king, sole sovereign of his actions as of his thoughts. To that General is reserved the glory of consummating the grand revolution which has so long been the ultimate object of our mysteries. Whatever proofs I may have adduced, that must naturally lead my readers to such a conclusion, it may nevertheless be an object of surprise to them to see that Weishaupt had really planned this long chain of subterraneous communications, by which himself and his successors were empowered to actuate thousand of legions, which instantaneously, on a day prescribed, might burst into existence armed with pikes and torches, and all the horrid implements of universal revolution. Let my readers then cast their eyes on this series of progression, which Weishaupt has with his own hand traced [p. 575] in his letters first to Cato-Zwack and afterwards to Celsus-Bader. The explanations are his own, and let them be particularly attended to. "For the present, direct nobody to me but Cortez, that I may have some leisure to digest my speculations, and determine each one's place; for every thing depends on that. My operations with you shall be directed by the following table: "Immediately under me I have two adepts, into whom I infuse my whole spirit; each of these corresponds with two others, and so on. By this method, and in the simplest way possible, I can inflame and put in motion thousands of men at once. It is by such means that orders are to be transmitted and political operations carried on." [*35] ipurcbasefc for tbe Sltbrars of be TUniverait? of {Toronto out of tbe proceeds of tbe fun& bequeatbefc bp Stewart, OB. A.D. 1892. THE WORKS OF HERMAN MELVILLE STANDARD EDITION VOLUME VII MOBY- DICK OR, THE WHALE BY HERMAN MELVILLE IN TWO VOLUMES VOL. I CONSTABLE AND COMPANY LTD LONDON BOMBAY SYDNEY 1922 Ps Printed in Great Britain by T. and A. CONSTABLE LTD at the Edinburgh University Press IN TOKEN OF MY ADMIRATION FOB HIS GENIUS THIS BOOK IS INSCRIBED TO NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE CONTENTS CHAP. PAGE I. LOOMINGS . 1 II. THE CARPET-BAG ...... 8 III. THE SPOUTER-INN . . . . . . 13 IV. THE COUNTERPANE . . . . . 31 V. BREAKFAST ...... 36 VI. THE STREET . . . . . 39 VII. THE CHAPEL . . . . . . 42 VIII. THE PULPIT ....... 46 IX. THE SERMON ...... 49 X. A BOSOM FRIEND ...... 60 XI. NIGHTGOWN 65 XII. BIOGRAPHICAL ...... 68 XIII. WHEELBARROW . . . . . . 71 XIV. NANTUCKET ....... 77 XV. CHOWDER ....... 80 XVI. THE SHIP . 84 XVII. THE RAMADAN ...... 102 XVHI. HIS MARK ....... 110 XIX. THE PROPHET . . . . . .115 XX. ALL ASTIR ....... 119 XXI. GOING ABOARD ...... 122 XXII. MERRY CHRISTMAS . . . . .126 XXIII. THE LEE SHORE . . . . . .132 XXIV. THE ADVOCATE . . . . . .134 XXV. POSTSCRIPT . . . . . 140 XXVI. KNIGHTS AND SQUIRES . . . .141 XXVII. KNIGHTS AND SQUIRES .... 145 XXVIII. AHAB ....... 151 vii viii MOBY-DICK CHAP. PAGE XXIX. ENTER AHAB ; TO HIM, STUBB . . .156 XXX. THE PIPE ...... 160 XXXI. QUEEN MAB 161 XXXII. CETOLOGY . . . . . .164 XXXIII. THE SPECKS YNDER 180 XXXIV. THE CABIN -TABLE 184 XXXV. THE MAST-HEAD . . . . .191 XXXVI. THE QUARTER-DECK ..... 199 XXXVII. SUNSET . . . . . . . 209 XXXVIII. DUSK 211 XXXIX. FIRST NIGHT-WATCH . . . . .213 XL. MIDNIGHT, FORECASTLE . . . .214 XLI. MOBY-DICK ...... 222 XLII. THE WHITENESS OF THE WHALE . . 234 XLIII. HARK! 245 XLIV. THE CHART ...... 247 XLV. THE AFFIDAVIT ...... 254 XLVI. SURMISES 265 XLVII. THE MAT-MAKER 269 XLVIII. THE FIRST LOWERING . . . . . 273 XLIX. THE HYENA ...... 286 L. AHAB'S BOAT AND CREW. FED ALLAH . . 289 LI. THE SPIRIT-SPOUT 293 MI. THE ALBATROSS ...... 298 Mil. THE GAM 301 LIV. THE TOWN-HO'S STORY 306 LV. OF THE MONSTROUS PICTURES OF WHALES . 331 LVI. OF THE LESS ERRONEOUS PICTURES OF WHALES 337 LVII. OF WHALES IN PAINT, IN TEETH, ETC. . 342 LVIII. BRIT 346 LIX. SQUID 350 LX. THE LINE . 353 MOBY-DICK OR THE WHALE ETYMOLOGY (SUPPLIED BY A LATE CONSUMPTIVE USHER TO A GBAMMAB SCHOOL) THE pale Usher threadbare in coat, heart, body, and brain ; I see him now. He was ever dusting his old lexicons and grammars, with a queer handkerchief, mockingly embellished with all the gay flags of all the known nations of the world. He loved to dust his old grammars ; it somehow mildly reminded him of his mortality. ETYMOLOGY ' WHILE you take in hand to school others, and to teach them by what name a whale-fish is to be called in our tongue, leaving out, through ignorance, the letter H, which almost alone maketh up the signification of the word, you deliver that which is not true.' Hakluyt. 1 WHALE. * * * Sw. and Dan. hval. This animal is named from roundness or rolling ; for in Dan. hvalt is arched or vaulted.' Webster's Dictionary. ' WHALE. * * * It is more immediately from the Dut. and Ger. W alien ; A.S. Walw-ian y to roll, to wallow.' Richardson's Dictionary. Hebrew. Greek. Latin, Anglo-Saxon. Danish. Dutch. Swedish. Icelandic. English. in, CETUS, WHCEL, HVALT, WAL, HWAL, WHALE, WHALE, BALEINE, BALLENA, PEKEE-NUEE-NUEE, PEHEE-NUEE-NUEE, French. Spanish. Feegee. Erromangoan. EXTRACTS (SUPPLIED BY A SUB-SUB-LIBRARIAN) IT will be seen that this mere painstaking burrower and grub -worm of a poor devil of a Sub -Sub appears to have gone through the long Vaticans and street-stalls of the earth, pick- ing up whatever random allusions to whales he could anyways find in any book whatsoever, sacred or profane. Therefore you must not, in every case at least, take the higgledy-piggledy whale statements, however authentic, in these extracts, for veritable gospel cetology. Far from it. As touching the ancient authors generally, as well as the poets here appearing, these extracts are solely valuable or entertaining, as affording a glancing bird's-eye view of what has been promiscuously said, thought, fancied, and sung of Leviathan, by many nations and generations, including our own. So fare thee well, poor devil of a Sub-Sub, whose commen- tator I am. Thou belongest to that hopeless, sallow tribe which no wine of this world will ever warm ; and for whom even Pale Sherry would be too rosy-strong ; but with whom one sometimes loves to sit, and feel poor-devilish, too ; and grow convivial upon tears ; and say to them bluntly with full eyes and empty glasses, and in not altogether unpleasant sadness Give it up, Sub-Subs ! For by how much the more pains ye take to please the world, by so much the more shall ye forever go thankless ! Would that I could clear out Hampton Court and the Tuileries for ye ! But gulp down your tears and hie aloft to the royal-mast with your hearts ; for your friends who have gone before are clearing out the seven-storied heavens, and making refugees of long-pampered Gabriel, Michael, and Raphael, against your coming. Here ye strike but splintered hearts together there, ye shall strike unsplinterable glasses! xii EXTRACTS ' And God created great whales.' Genesis. * Leviathan maketh a path to shine after him ; One would think the deep to be hoary.' Job. ' Now the Lord had prepared a great fish to swallow up Jonah.' Jonah. ' There go the ships ; there is that Leviathan whom thou hast made to play therein.' Psalms. ' In that day, the Lord with his sore, and great, and strong sword, shall punish Leviathan the piercing serpent, even Leviathan that crooked serpent ; and he shall slay the dragon that is in the sea.' Isaiah. * And what thing soever besides cometh within the chaos of this monster's mouth, be it beast, boat, or stone, down it goes all incontinently that foul great swallow of his, and perisheth in the bottomless gulf of his paunch.' HollancFs Plutarch's Morals. ' The Indian Sea breedeth the most and the biggest fishes that are : among which the Whales and Whirlpooles called Balaene, take up as much in length as four acres or arpens of land.' Holland's Pliny. ' Scarcely had we proceeded two days on the sea, when about sunrise a great many Whales and other monsters of the sea, appeared. Among the former, one was of a most monstrous size. * * * This came towards us, open- mouthed, raising the waves on all sides, and beating the sea before him into a foam.' Tooke's Lucian. The True History. xiii xiv MOBY-DICK ' He visited this country also with a view of catching horse - whales, which had bones of very great value for their teeth, of which he brought some to the king. * * * The best whales were catched in his own country, of which some were forty-eight, some fifty yards long. He said that he was one of six who had killed sixty in two days.' Other or Octher's verbal narrative taken down from his mouth by King Alfred, A.D. 890. 1 And whereas all the other things, whether beast or vessel, that enter into the dreadful gulf of this monster's (whale's) mouth, are immediately lost and swallowed up, the sea- gudgeon retires into it in great security, and there sleeps.' Montaigne 1 s Apology for Eaimond Sebond. ' Let us fly, let us fly ! Old Nick take me if it is not Leviathan described by the noble prophet Moses in the life of patient Job.' Rabelais. ' This whale's liver was two cart-loads.' Stowe's Annals. 1 The great Leviathan that maketh the seas to seethe like boiling pan.' Lord Bacon's Version of the Psalms. ' Touching that monstrous bulk of the whale or ork we have received nothing certain. They grow exceeding fat, insomuch that an incredible quantity of oil will be extracted out of one whale.' Ibid. History of Life and Death. 1 The sovereignest thing on earth is parmacetti for an in- ward bruise.' King Henry. ' Very like a whale.' Hamlet. ' Which to secure, no skill of leach's art Mote him availle, but to returne againe To his wound's worker, that with lowly dart, Dinting his breast, had bred his restless paine, Like as the wounded whale to shore flies thro' the maine.' The Fairie Queen. ' Immense as whales, the motion of whose vast bodies can in a peaceful calm trouble the ocean till it boil.' Sir William Davenant's Preface to Gondibert. EXTRACTS xv ' What spermaceti! is, men might justly doubt, since the learned Hosmannus in his work of thirty years, saith plainly, Nescio quid sit.' Sir T. Browne's Of Sperma Ceti and the Sperma Ceti Whale. Vide his V.E. ' Like Spencer's Talus with his modern flail He threatens ruin with his ponderous tail. ****** Their fixed jav'lins in his side he wears, And on his back a grove of pikes appears.' Waller's Battle of the Summer Islands. ' By art is created that great Leviathan, called a Common- wealth or State (in Latin, Civitas) which is but an artificial man.' Opening sentence of Hobbes's Leviathan. 'Silly Mansoul swallowed it without chewing, as if it had been a sprat in the mouth of a whale.' Pilgrim's Progress. * That sea beast Leviathan, which God of all his works Created hugest that swim the ocean stream.' Paradise Lost. 4 There Leviathan, Hugest of living creatures, in the deep Stretched like a promontory sleeps or swims, And seems a moving land ; and at his gills Draws in, and at his breath spouts out a sea.' Ibid. ' The mighty whales which swim in a sea of water, and have a sea of oil swimming in them.' Fuller's Profane and Holy State. ' So close behind some promontory lie The huge Leviathans to attend their prey, And give no chace, but swallow in the fry, Which through their gaping jaws mistake the way.' Dry den's Annus Mirabilis. ' While the whale is floating at the stern of the ship, they cut off his head, and tow it with a boat as near the shore as it will come ; but it will be aground in twelve or thirteen feet water.' Thomas Edge's Ten Voyages to Spitzbergen, in Purchas. xvi MOBY-DICK * In their way they saw many whales sporting in the ocean, and in wantonness fuzzing up the water through their pipes and vents, which nature has placed on their shoulders.' Sir T. Herberts Voyages into Asia and Africa. Harris Coll. 4 Here they saw such huge troops of whales, that they were forced to proceed with a great deal of caution for fear they should run their ship upon them.' Schouten's Sixth Circumnavigation. * We set sail from the Elbe, wind N.E. in the ship called The Jonas-in-the-Whale. * * * Some say the whale can't open his mouth, but that is a fable. * * * They frequently climb up the masts to see whether they can see a whale, for the first discoverer has a ducat for his pains. * * * I was told of a whale taken near Shetland, that had above a barrel of herrings in his belly. * * * One of our harpooneers told me that he caught once a whale in Spitzbergen that was white all over.' A Voyage to Greenland, A.D. 1671. Harris Coll. ' Several whales have come in upon this coast (Fife). Anno 1652, one eighty feet in length of the whale -bone kind came in, which, (as I was informed) besides a vast quantity of oil, did afford 500 weight of baleen. The jaws of it stand for a gate in the garden of Pitferren.' Sibbald's Fife and Kinross. 4 Myself have agreed to try whether I can master and kill this Sperma-ceti whale, for I could never hear of any of that sort that was killed by any man, such is his fierceness and swiftness.' Richard Strafford's Letter from the Bermudas. Phil. Trans. A.D. 1668. ' Whales in the sea God's voice obey.' N. E. Primer. 1 We saw also abundance of large whales, there being more in those southern seas, as I may say, by a hundred to one ; than we have to the northward of us.' Captain Cowley's Voyage round the Globe, A.D. 1729. EXTRACTS xvii ****** an( j ^e breath of the whale is fre- quently attended with such an insupportable smell, as to bring on a disorder of the brain.' Ulloa's South America. 1 To fifty chosen sylphs of special note, We trust the important charge, the petticoat. Oft have we known that seven-fold fence to fail, Tho' stuffed with hoops and armed with ribs of whale.' Rape of the Lock. ' If we compare land animals in respect to magnitude, with those that take up their abode in the deep, we shall find they will appear contemptible in the comparison. The whale is doubtless the largest animal in creation.' Goldsmith's Nat. Hist. ' If you should write a fable for little fishes, you would make them speak like great whales.' Goldsmith to Johnson. ' In the afternoon we saw what was supposed to be a rock, but it was found to be a dead whale, which some Asiatics had killed, and were then towing ashore. They seemed to en- deavour to conceal themselves behind the whale, in order to avoid being seen by us.' Cook's Voyages. ' The larger whales, they seldom venture to attack. They stand in so great dread of some of them, that when out at sea they are afraid to mention even their names, and carry dung, lime-stone, juniper-wood, and some other articles of the same nature in their boats, in order to terrify and prevent their too near approach.' Uno Von Troil's Letters on Banks' s and Solander's Voyage to Iceland in 1772. ' The Spermacetti Whale found by the Nantuckois, is an active, fierce animal, and requires vast address and bold- ness in the fishermen.' Thomas Jefferson's Whale Memorial to the French Minister in 1778. 1 And pray, sir, what in the world is equal to it ? ' Edmund Burke's Reference in Parliament to the Nantucket Whale Fishery. VOL. I. b xviii MOBY-DICK ' Spain a great whale stranded on. the shores of Europe.' Edmund Burke. (Somewhere.} ' A tenth branch of the king's ordinary revenue, said to be grounded on the consideration of his guarding and pro- tecting the seas from pirates and robbers, is the right to royal fish, which are whale and sturgeon. And these, when either thrown ashore or caught near the coast, are the pro- perty of the king.' Blackstone. c Soon to the sport of death the crews repair : Rodmond unerring o'er his head suspends The barbed steel, and every turn attends.' Falconer's Shipwreck. ' Bright shone the roofs, the domes, the spires, And rockets blew self driven, To hang their momentary fire Around the vault of heaven. ' So fire with water to compare, The ocean serves on high, Up-spouted by a whale in air, To express unwieldy joy.' Cowper, On the Queen's Visit to London. ' Ten or fifteen gallons of blood are thrown out of the heart at a stroke, with immense velocity.' John Hunter's Account of the Dissection of a Whale. (A small-sized one.) ' The aorta of a whale is larger in the bore than the main pipe of the water- works at London Bridge, and the water roaring in its passage through that pipe is inferior in impetus and velocity to the blood gushing from the whale's heart.' Paley's Theology. ' The whale is a mammiferous animal without hind feet.' Baron Cuvier. ' In 40 degrees south, we saw Spermacetti Whales, but did not take any till the first of May, the sea being then covered with them.' Colnett's Voyage for the Purpose of Extending the Spermacetti Whale Fishery. EXTRACTS xix ' In the free element beneath me swam, Floundered and dived, in play, in chace, in battle, Fishes of every colour, form, and kind ; Which language cannot paint, and mariner Had never seen ; from dread Leviathan To insect millions peopling every wave : Gather'd in shoals immense, like floating islands, Led by mysterious instincts through that waste And trackless region, though on every side Assaulted by voracious enemies, Whales, sharks, and monsters, arm'd in front or jaw, With swords, saws, spiral horns, or hooked fangs.' Montgomery' '<$ World before the Flood. ' lo ! Paean ! lo ! sing, To the finny people's king. Not a mightier whale than this In the vast Atlantic is ; Not a fatter fish than he, Flounders round the Polar Sea.' CJiarles Lamb's Triumph of the Whale. ' In the year 1690 some persons were on a high hill observing the whales spouting and sporting with each other, when one observed ; there pointing to the sea is a green pasture where our children's grand-children will go for bread.' Obed Macy's History of Nantucket. ' I built a cottage for Susan and myself and made a gateway in the form of a Gothic Arch, by setting up a whale's jaw bones.' Hawthorne's Twice-Told Tales. ' She came to bespeak a monument for her first love, who had been killed by a whale in the Pacific ocean, no less than forty years ago.' Ibid. ' " No, Sir, 'tis a Right Whale," answered Tom ; " I saw his spout ; he threw up a pair of as pretty rainbows as a Christian would wish to look at. He 's a raal oil-butt, that fellow ! " ' Cooper's Pilot. ' The papers were brought in,, and we saw in the Berlin Gazette that whales had been introduced on the stage there.' Eckermanris Conversations with Goethe. xx MOBY-DICK ' " My God ! Mr. Chace, what is the matter ? " I answered, " We have been stove by a whale." ! Narrative of the Shipwreck of the Whale Ship Essex of Nantucket, which was attacked and finally destroyed by a large Sperm Whale in the Pacific Ocean. By Owen Chace of Nan- tucket, first mate of said vessel. New York, 1821. ' A mariner sat in the shrouds one night, The wind was piping free ; Now bright, now dimmed, was the moonlight pale, And the phospher gleamed in the wake of the whale, As it floundered in the sea.' Elizabeth Oakes Smith. ' The quantity of line withdrawn from the different boats engaged in the capture of this one whale, amounted alto- gether to 10,440 yards or nearly six English miles. * * * t Sometimes the whale shakes its tremendous tail in the air, which, cracking like a whip, resounds to the distance of three or four miles.' Scoresby. 1 Mad with the agonies he endures from these fresh attacks, the infuriated Sperm Whale rolls over and over ; he rears his enormous head, and with wide expanded jaws snaps at every- thing around him ; he rushes at the boats with his head ; they are propelled before him with vast swiftness, and some- times utterly destroyed. * * * It is a matter of great astonishment that the consideration of the habits of so interesting, and, in a com- mercial point of view, of so important an animal (as the Sperm Whale) should have been so entirely neglected, or should have excited so little curiosity among the numerous, and many of them competent observers, that of late years must have possessed the most abundant and the most convenient oppor- tunities of witnessing their habitudes. 5 Thomas Beale's History of the Sperm Whale. 1839. ' The Cachalot ' (Sperm Whale) ' is not only better armed than the True Whale ' (Greenland or Right Whale) ' in possess- ing a formidable weapon at either extremity of its body, but also more frequently displays a disposition to employ these weapons offensively, and in a manner at once so artful, EXTRACTS xxi bold, and mischievous, as to lead to its being regarded as the most dangerous to attack of all the known species of the whale tribe.' Frederick Debell Bennett's Whaling Voyage round the Globe. 1840. ' October 13. " There she blows," was sung out from the mast-head. " Where away ? " demanded the captain. " Three points off the lee bow, sir." " Raise up your wheel. Steady ! " " Steady, sir." " Mast-head ahoy ! Do you see that whale now ? " " Ay, ay, sir ! A shoal of Sperm Whales ! There she blows ! There she breaches ! " " Sing out ! sing out every time ! " " Ay, ay, sir ! There she blows ! there there thar she blows bowes bo-o-o-s ! " " How far off ? " c< Two miles and a half." " Thunder and lightning ! so near ! Call all hands ! " J. Ross Browne's Etchings of a Whaling Cruise. 1846. 4 The Whale-ship Globe, on board of which vessel occurred the horrid transactions we are about to relate, belonged to the island of Nantucket.' Narrative of the Globe Mutiny, by Lay and Hussey, Survivors. A.D. 1828. c Being once pursued by a whale which he had wounded, he parried the assault for some time with a lance ; but the furious monster at length rushed on the boat ; himself and comrades only being preserved by leaping into the water when they saw the onset was inevitable. 5 Missionary Journal of Tyerman and Bennett. ' Nantucket itself,' said Mr. Webster, ' is a very striking and peculiar portion of the National interest. There is a population of eight or nine thousand persons, living here in the sea, adding largely every year to the National wealth by the boldest and most persevering industry.' Report of Daniel Webster's Speech in the U.S. Senate, on the Application for the Erection of a Breakwater at Nantucket. 1828. xxii . MOBY-DICK ' The whale fell directly over him, and probably killed him in a moment.' The Whale and his Captors, or the Whale- man's Adventures and the Whale's Bio- graphy, gathered on the Homeward Cruise of the Commodore Preble. By Rev. Henry T. Cheever. ' " If you make the least damn bit of noise," replied Samuel, " I will send you to hell." ' Life of Samuel Comstock (the Mutineer), by his Brother, William Comstock. Another Version of the Whale-ship Globe Narrative. ' The voyages of the Dutch and English to the Northern Ocean, in order, if possible, to discover a passage through it to India, though they failed of their main object, laid open the haunts of the whale.' McCulloch's Commercial Dictionary. 4 These things are reciprocal ; the ball rebounds, only to bound forward again ; for now in laying open the haunts of the whale, the whalemen seem to have indirectly hit upon new clews to that same mystic North -West Passage.' From ' Something ' unpublished. 4 It is impossible to meet a whale-ship on the ocean with- out being struck by her near appearance. The vessel under short sail, with look-outs at the mast-heads, eagerly scanning the wide expanse around them, has a totally different air from those engaged in a regular voyage.' Currents and Whaling. U.S. Ex. Ex. 1 Pedestrians in the vicinity of London and elsewhere may recollect having seen large curved bones set upright in the earth, either to form arches over gateways, or entrances to alcoves, and they may perhaps have been told that these were the ribs of whales.' Tales of a Whale Voyager to the Arctic Ocean. ' It was not till the boats returned from the pursuit of these whales, that the whites saw their ship in bloody possession of the savages enrolled among the crew.' Newspaper Account of the Taking and Retaking of the Whale-ship Hobomack. EXTRACTS xxiii ' It is generally well known that out of the crews of Whaling vessels (American) few ever return in the ships on board of which they departed.' Cruise in a Whale Boat. 1 Suddenly a mighty mass emerged from the water, and shot up perpendicularly into the air. It was the whale.' Miriam Coffin or the Whale Fisherman. ' The Whale is harpooned to be sure ; but bethink you, how you would manage a powerful unbroken colt, with the mere appliance of a rope tied to the root of his tail.' A Chapter on WJialing in Ribs and Trucks. ' On one occasion I saw two of these monsters (whales) probably male and female, slowly swimming, one after the other, within less than a stone's throw of the shore ' (Tierra del Fuego), ' over which the beech tree extended its branches.' Darwin's Voyage of a Naturalist. ' " Stern all ! " exclaimed the mate, as upon turning his head, he saw the distended jaws of a large Sperm Whale close to the head of the boat, threatening it with instant destruction ; " Stern all, for your lives ! " Wharton the Whale Killer. ' So be cheery, my lads, let your hearts never fail, While the bold harpooneer is striking the whale ! ' Nantucket Song. ' Oh, the rare old Whale, mid storm and gale, In his ocean home will be A giant in might, where might is right, And King of the boundless sea.' Whale Song. MOBY-DICK CHAPTER I LOOMINGS CALL me Ishmael. Some years ago never mind how long precisely having little or no money in my purse, and nothing particular to interest me on shore, I thought I would sail about a little and see the watery part of the world. It is a way I have of driving off the spleen, and regulating the circulation. Whenever I find myself growing grim about the mouth ; whenever it is a damp, drizzly November in my soul ; whenever I find myself involuntarily pausing before coffin warehouses, and bring- ing up the rear of every funeral I meet ; and especially whenever my hypos get such an upper hand of me, that it requires a strong moral principle to prevent me from deliberately stepping into the street, and methodically knocking people's hats off then, I account it high time to get to sea as soon as I can. This is my substitute for pistol and ball. With a philosophical flourish Cato throws himself upon his sword ; I quietly take to the ship. There is nothing surprising in this. If they but knew it, almost all men in their degree, some time or other, cherish very nearly the same feelings toward the ocean with me. There now is your insular city of the Manhattoes, belted round by wharves as Indian isles by coral reefs commerce surrounds it with her surf. Right and left, the streets take you waterward. Its extreme down -town is the battery, where that noble mole is washed by waves, and VOL. I. A 2 MOBY-DICK cooled by breezes, which a few hours previous were out of sight of land. Look at the crowds of water -gazers there. Circumambulate the city of a dreamy Sabbath after- noon. Go from Corlears Hook to Coenties Slip, and from thence, by Whitehall, northward. What do you see ? Posted like silent sentinels all around the town, stand thousands upon thousands of mortal men fixed in ocean reveries. Some leaning against the spiles ; some seated upon the pier-heads ; some looking over Vhe bulwarks of ships from China ; some high aloft in the rigging, as if striving to get a still better seaward peep. But these are all landsmen ; of week days pent up in lath and plaster tied to counters, nailed to benches, clinched to desks. How then is this ? Are the green fields gone ? What do they here ? But look ! here come more crowds, pacing straight for the water, and seemingly bound for a dive. Strange ! Nothing will content them but the extremest limit of the land ; loitering under the shady lee of yonder warehouses will not suffice. No. They must get just as nigh the water as they possibly can without falling in. And there they stand miles of them leagues. Inlanders all, they come from lanes and alleys, streets and avenues north, east, south, and west. Yet here they all unite. Tell me, does the magnetic virtue of the needles of the compasses of all those ships attract them thither ? Once more. Say, you are in the country ; in some high land of lakes. Take almost any path you please, and ten to one it carries you down in a dale, and leaves you there by a pool in the stream. There is magic in it. Let the most absent-minded of men be plunged in his deepest reveries stand that man on his legs, set his feet a-going, and he will infallibly lead you to water, if water there be in all that region. Should you ever be athirst in the great American desert, try this experiment, if your LOOMINGS 3 caravan happen to be supplied with a metaphysical professor. Yes, as everyone knows, meditation andli water are wedded forever. But here is an artist. He desires to paint you the dreamiest, shadiest, quietest, most enchanting bit of romantic landscape in all the valley of the Saco. What is the chief element he employs ? There stand his trees, each with a hollow trunk, as if a hermit and a crucifix were within ; and here sleeps his meadow, and there sleep his cattle ; and up from yonder cottage goes a sleepy smoke. Deep into distant woodlands winds a mazy way, reaching to overlapping spurs of mountains bathed in their hillside blue. But though the picture lies thus tranced, and though this pine-tree shakes down its sighs like leaves upon this shepherd's head, yet all were vain, unless the shepherd's eye were fixed upon the magic stream before him. Go visit the Prairies in June, when for scores on scores of miles you wade knee -deep among tiger-lilies what is the one charm wanting ?- Water there is not a drop of water there ! Were Niagara but a cataract of sand, would you travel your thousand miles to see it ? Why did the poor poet of Tennessee, upon suddenly receiving two handfuls of silver, deliberate whether to buy him a coat, which he sadly needed, or invest his money in a pedestrian trip to Rockaway Beach ? Why is almost every robust healthy boy with a robust healthy soul in him, at some time or other crazy to go to sea ? Why upon your first voyage as a passenger, did you yourself feel such a mystical vibration, when first ; told that you and your ship were now out of sight of ' land ? Why did the old Persians hold the sea holy ? Why did the Greeks give it a separate deity, and own brother of Jove ? Surely all this is not without meaning. And still deeper the meaning of that story of Narcissus, who because he could not grasp the tormenting, mild 4 MOBY-DICK image he saw in the fountain, plunged into it and was drowned. But that same image, we ourselves see in all rivers and oceans. It is the image of the ungraspable phantom of life ; and this is the key to it all. Now, when I say that I am in the habit of going to sea whenever I begin to grow hazy about the eyes, and begin to be over conscious of my lungs, I do not mean to have it inferred that I ever go to sea as a passenger. For to go as a passenger you must needs have a purse, and a purse is but a rag unless you have something in it. Be- sides, passengers get sea-sick grow quarrelsome don't sleep of nights do not enjoy themselves much, as a general thing ; no, I never go as a passenger ; nor, though I am something of a salt, do I ever go to sea as a Commodore, or a Captain, or a Cook. I abandon the glory and distinction of such offices to those who like them. For my part, I abominate all honourable respect- able toils, trials, and tribulations of every kind what- soever. It is quite as much as I can do to take care of myself, without taking care of ships, barques, brigs, schooners, and what not. And as for going as cook, though I confess there is considerable glory in that, a cook being a sort of officer on shipboard yet, somehow, I never fancied broiling fowls ; though once broiled, judiciously buttered, and judgmatically salted and peppered, there is no one who will speak more respect- fully, not to say reverentially, of a broiled fowl than I will. It is out of the idolatrous do tings of the old Egyptians upon broiled ibis and roasted river horse, that you see the mummies of those creatures in their huge bake-houses the pyramids. No, when I go to sea, I go as a simple sailor, right before the mast, plumb down into the forecastle, aloft there to the royal mast-head. True, they rather order me about some, and make me jump from spar to spar, LOOMINGS 5 like a grasshopper in a May meadow. And at first, this sort of thing is unpleasant enough. It touches one's sense of honour, particularly if you come of an old estab- lished family in the land, the Van Rensselaers, or Ran- dolphs, or Hardicanutes. And more than all, if just previous to putting your hand into the tar-pot, you have been lording it as a country schoolmaster, making the tallest boys stand in awe of you. The transition is a keen one, I assure you, from a schoolmaster to a sailor, and requires a strong decoction of Seneca and the Stoics to enable you to grin and bear it. But even this wears off hi time. What of it, if some old hunks of a sea-captain orders me to get a broom and sweep down the decks ? What does that indignity amount to, weighed, I mean, in the scales of the New Testament ? Do you think the arch- angel Gabriel thinks anything the less of me, because I promptly and respectfully obey that old hunks in that particular instance ? Who ain/t a slave ? Tell me that. Well, then, however the~old^sea -captains may order me about however they may thump and punch me about, I have the satisfaction of knowing that it is all right ; that everybody else is one way or other served in much the same way either in a physical or metaphysical point of view, that is ; and so the universal thump is passed round, and all hands should rub each other's shoulder- blades, and be content. Again, I always go to sea as a sailor, because they make a point of paying me for my trouble, whereas they never pay passengers a single penny that I ever heard of. On the contrary, passengers themselves must pay. And there is all the difference in the world between paying and being paid. The act of paying is perhaps the most uncomfortable infliction that the two orchard thieves entailed upon us. But being paid, what will compare 6 MOBY-DICK with it ? The urbane activity with which a man receives money is really marvellous, considering that we so earnestly believe money to be the root of all earthly ills, and that on no account can a monied man enter heaven. Ah ! how cheerfully we consign ourselves to perdition ! Finally, I always go to sea as a sailor, because of the wholesome exercise and pure air of the forecastle deck. For as in this world, head-winds are far more prevalent than winds from astern (that is, if you never violate the Pythagorean maxim), so for the most part the com- modore on the quarter-deck gets his atmosphere at second hand from the sailors on the forecastle. He thinks he breathes it first ; but not so. In much the same way do the commonalty lead their leaders in many other things, at the same time that the leaders little suspect it. But wherefore it was that after having repeatedly smelt the sea as a merchant sailor, I should now take it into my head to go on a whaling voyage ; this the invisible police-officer of the Fates, who has the constant surveil- lance of me, and secretly dogs me, and influences me in some unaccountable way he can better answer than any one else. And, doubtless, my going on this whaling voyage formed part of the grand programme of Provi- dence that was drawn up a long time ago. It came in as a sort of brief interlude and solo between more exten- sive performances. I take it that this part of the bill must have run something like this : ' Grand Contested Election for the Presidency of the United States. ' WHALING VOYAGE BY ONE ISHMAEL. 1 BLOODY BATTLE IN AFGHANISTAN.' Though I cannot tell why it was exactly that those stage managers, the Fates, put me down for this shabby LOOMINGS 7 part of a whaling voyage, when others were set down for magnificent parts in high tragedies, and short and easy parts in genteel comedies, and jolly parts in farces though I cannot tell why this was exactly ; yet, now that I recall all the circumstances, I think I can see a little into the springs and motives which, being cunningly presented to me under various disguises, induced me to set about performing the part I did, besides cajoling me into the delusion that it was a choice resulting from my own unbiased freewill and discriminating judgment. Chief among these motives was the overwhelming idea of the great whale himself. Such a gortentous and mysterious monster roused all my curiosity. Then the wild and distant seas where he rolled his island bulk ; the undeliverable, nameless perils of the whale ; these, with all the attending marvels of a thousand Patagonian sights and sounds, helped to sway me to my wish. With other men, perhaps, such things would not have been inducements ; but as for me, I am tormented with an everlasting itch for things remote. I love to sail for- bidden seas, and land on barbarous coasts. Not ignoring what is good, I am quick to perceive a horror, and could still be social with it would they let me since it is but well to be on friendly terms with all the inmates of the place one lodges in. By reason of these things, then, the whaling voyage was welcome ; the great flood-gates of the wonder-world swung open, and in the wild conceits that swayed me to my purpose, two and two there floated into my inmost soul, endless processions of the whale, and, midmost of them all, one grand hooded phantom, like a snow hill in the air. CHAPTER II THE CARPET-BAG I stuffed a shirt or two into my old carpet-bag, tucked it under my arm, and started for Cape Horn and the Pacific. Quitting the good city of old Manhatto, I duly arrived in New Bedford. It was on a Saturday night in December. Much was I disappointed upon learning that the little packet for Nantucket had already sailed, and that no way of reaching that place would offer, till the following Monday. As most young candidates for the pains and penalties of whaling stop at this same New Bedford, thence to embark on their voyage, it may as well be related that I 5 for one, had no idea of so doing. For my mind was made up to sail in no other than a Nantucket craft, because there was a fine, boisterous something about everything connected with that famous old island, which amazingly pleased me. Besides, though New Bedford has of late been gradually monopolising the business of whaling, and though in this matter poor old Nantucket is now much behind her, yet Nantucket was her great original the Tyre of this Carthage ; the place where the first dead American whale was stranded. Where else but from Nantucket did those aboriginal whalemen, the Red Men, first sally out in canoes to give chase to the leviathan ? And where but from Nantucket, too, did that first adven- turous little sloop put forth, partly laden with imported cobble-stones so goes the story to throw at the whales, THE CARPET-BAG 9 in order to discover when they were nigh enough to risk a harpoon from the bowsprit ? Now having a night, a day, and still another night following before me in New Bedford, ere I could embark for my destined port, it became a matter of concernment where I was to eat and sleep meanwhile. It was a very dubious-looking, nay, a very dark and dismal night, bitingly cold and cheerless. I knew no one in the place. With anxious grapnelsJE had sounded my pocket, and only brought up a few pieces of silver. So, wherever you go, Ishmael, said I to myself, as I stood in the middle of a dreary street shouldering my bag, and comparing the gloom toward the north with the darkness toward the south wherever in your wisdom you may conclude to lodge for the night, my dear Ishmael, be sure to inquire the price, and don't be too particular. With halting steps I paced the streets, and passed the sign of 'The Crossed Harpoons ' but it looked too expen- sive and jolly there. Further on, from the bright red windows of the ' Sword-Fish Inn,' there came such fer- vent rays, that it seemed to have melted the packed snow and ice from before the house, for everywhere else the congealed frost lay ten inches thick in a hard, asphaltic pavement, rather weary for me, when I struck my foot against the flinty projections, because from hard, remorse- less service the soles of mv boots were in a most miserable V plight. Too expensive and jolly, again thought I, pausing one moment to watch the broad glare in the street, and hear the sounds of the tinkling glasses within. But go i on, Ishmael, said I at last ; don't you hear ? get away l from before the door ; your patched boots are stopping the way. So on I went. I now by instinct followed the streets that took me waterward, for there, doubtless, were the cheapest, if not the cheeriest inns. Such dreary streets ! blocks of blackness, not houses, 10 MOBY-DICK on either hand, and here and there a candle, like a candle moving about in a tomb. At this hour of the night, of the last day of the week, that quarter of the town proved all but deserted. But presently I carne to a smoky light proceeding from a low, wide building, the door of which stood invitingly open. It had a careless look, as if it were meant for the uses of the public ; so, entering, the first thing I did was to stumble over an ash-box in the porch. Ha ! thought I, ha, as the flying particles almost choked me, are these ashes from that destroyed city, Gomorrah ? But ' The Cfossed Harpoons ' and 4 The Sword-Fish ' ? this, then, must needs be the sign of ' The Trap. ' However, I picked myself up , and hearing a loud voice within, pushed on and opened a second, interior door. It seemed the great Black Parliament sitting in Tophet. A hundred black faces turned round in their rows to peer ; and beyond, a black Angel of Doom was beating a book in a pulpit. It was a negro church ; and the preacher's text was about the blackness of darkness, and the weep- ing and wailing and teeth -gnashing there. Ha, Ishmael, muttered I, backing out, Wretched entertainment at the sign of ' The Trap ' ! Moving on, I at last came to a dim sort of light not far from the docks, and heard a forlorn creaking in the air ; and looking up, saw a swinging sign over the door with a white painting upon it, faintly representing a tall straight jet of misty spray, and these words underneath ' The Spouter-Inn : Peter Coffin.' Coffin ? Spouter ? Rather ominous in that particu- lar connection, thought I. But it is a common name in Nantucket, they say, and I suppose this Peter here is an emigrant from there. As the light looked so dim, and the place, for the time, looked quiet enough, and the dilapidated little wooden house itself looked as if it might THE CARPET-BAG 11 have been carted here from the ruins of some burnt dis- trict, and as the swinging sign had a poverty-stricken sort of creak to it, I thought that here was the very spot for cheap lodgings, and the best of pea-coffee. It was a queer sort of place a gable-ended old house, one side palsied as it were, and leaning over sadly. It stood on a sharp bleak corner, where that tempestuous wind Euroclydon kept up a worse howling than ever it did about poor Paul's tossed craft. Euroclydon, never- theless, is a mighty pleasant zephyr to anyone indoors, with his feet on the hob quietly toasting for bed. 4 In judging of that tempestuous wind called Euroclydon,' says an old writer of whose works I possess the only copy extant ' it maketh a marvellous difference, whether thou lookest out at it from a glass window where the frost is all on the outside, or whether thou observest it from that Cashless window, where the frost is on both sides, and of which the wight Death is the only glazier.' True enough, thought I, as this passage occurred to my mind old black-letter, thou reasonest well. Yes, these eyes are windows, and this body of mine is the house. What a pity they didn't stop up the chinks and the crannies though, and thrust in a little lint here and there. But it 's too late to make any improvements now. The universe is finished ; the cope-stone is on, and the chips were carted off a million years ago. Poor Lazarus there, chattering his teeth against the curbstone for his pillow, and shaking off his tatters with his shiverings, he might plug up both ears with rags, and put a corn-cob into his mouth, and yet that would not keep out the tempestuous Euroclydon. Euroclydon ! says old Dives, in his red silken wrapper (he had a redder one afterward) pooh, pooh ! What a fine frosty night ; how Orion glitters ; what northern lights ! Let them talk of their oriental summer climes of everlasting conservatories ; give me 12 MOBY-DICK the privilege of making my own summer with my own coals. But what thinks Lazarus ? Can he warm his blue hands by holding them up to the grand northern lights ? Would not Lazarus rather be in Sumatra than here ? Would he not far rather lay him down lengthwise along the line of the equator ; yea, ye gods ! go down to the fiery pit itself, in order to keep out this frost ? Now, that Lazarus should lie stranded there on the curbstone before the door of Dives, this is more wonderful than that an iceberg should be moored to one of the Moluccas. Yet Dives himself, he too lives like a Czar in an ice-palace made of frozen sighs, and being a president of a temperance society, he only drinks the tepid tears of orphans. But no more of this blubbering now, we are going a- whaling, and there is plenty of that yet to come. Let us scrape the ice from our frosted feet, and see what sort of a place this ' Spouter ' may be. CHAPTER III THE SPOTTTER-INN ENTERING that gable -ended Spouter-Inn, you found yourself in a wide, low, straggling entry with old-fashioned wainscots, reminding one of the bulwarks of some con- demned old craft. On one side hung a very large oil- painting so thoroughly besmoked, and every way defaced, that in the unequal cross-lights by which you viewed it, it was only by diligent study and a series of systematic visits to it, and careful inquiry of the neighbours, that you could any way arrive at an understanding of its purpose. Such unaccountable masses of shades and shadows, that at first you almost thought some ambitious young artist, in the time of the New England hags, had endeavoured to delineate chaos bewitched. But by dint of much and earnest contemplation, and oft-repeated ponderings, and especially by throwing open the little window toward the back of the entry, you at last come to the conclusion that such an idea, however wild, might not be altogether unwarranted. But what most puzzled and confounded you was a long, limber, portentous, black mass of something hover- ing in the centre of the picture over three blue, dim, perpendicular lines floating in a nameless yeast. A boggy, soggy, squitchy picture truly, enough to drive a nervous man distracted. Yet there was a sort of indefinite, half- attained, unimaginable sublimity about it that fairly froze you to it, till you in voluntarily, took an oath with yourself to find out what that marvellous painting meant. is 14 MOBY-DICK Ever and anon a bright, but, alas, deceptive idea would dart you through. It 's the Black Sea in a midnight gale. It 's the unnatural combat of the four primal elements. It 's a blasted heath. It 's a Hyperborean winter scene. It 's the breaking-up of the ice-bound stream of Time. But at last all these fancies yielded to that one portentous something in the picture's midst. That once found out, and all the rest were plain. But stop ; does it not bear a faint resemblance to a gigantic fish ? even the great leviathan himself ? In fact, the artist's design seemed this : a final theory of my own, partly based upon the aggregated opinions of many aged persons with whom I conversed upon the subject. The picture represents a Cape-Horner in a great hurricane ; the half-foundered ship weltering there with its three dismantled masts alone visible ; and an exasper- ated whale, purposing to spring clean over the craft, is in the enormous act of impaling himself upon the three mast-heads. The opposite wall of this entry was hung all over with a heathenish array of monstrous clubs and spears. Some were thickly set with glittering teeth resembling ivory saws ; others were tufted with knots of human hair ; and one was sickle-shaped, with a vast handle sweeping round like the segment made in the new-mown grass by a long- armed mower. You shuddered as you gazed, and wondered what monstrous cannibal and savage could ever have gone a death-harvesting with such a hacking, horrifying implement. Mixed with these were rusty old whaling-lances and harpoons all broken and deformed. Some were storied weapons. With this once long lance, now wildly elbowed, fifty years ago did Nathan Swain kill fifteen whales between a sunrise and a sunset. And that harpoon so like a corkscrew now was flung in Javan seas, and run away with by a whale, years after- THE SPOUTER-INN 15 ward slain off the Cape of Blanco. The original iron entered nigh the tail, and, like a restless needle sojourning in the body of a man, travelled full forty feet, and at last was found imbedded in the hump. Crossing this dusky entry, and on through yon low- arched way cut through what in old times must have been a great central chimney with fire-places all round you enter the public room. A still duskier place is this, with such low ponderous beams above, and such old wrinkled planks beneath, that you would almost fancy you trod some old craft's cockpits, especially of such a howling night, when this corner-anchored old ark rocked so furiously. On one side stood a long, low, shelf-like table covered with cracked glass cases, filled with dusty rarities gathered from this wide world's remotest nooks. Projecting from the further angle of the room stands a dark-looking den the bar a rude attempt at a right whale's head. Be that how it may, there stands the vast arched bone of the whale's jaw, so wide, a coach might almost drive beneath it. Within are shabby shelves, ranged round with old decanters, bottles, flasks ; and in those jaws of swift destruction, like another cursed Jonah (by which name indeed they called him), bustles a little withered old man, who, for their money, dearly sells the sailors deliriums and death. Abominable are the tumblers into which he pours his poison. Though true cylinders without within, the villainous green goggling glasses deceitfully tapered down- ward to a cheating bottom. Parallel meridians rudely pecked into the glass, surround these footpads' goblets. Fill to this mark, and your charge is but a penny ; to this a penny more ; and so on to the full glass the Cape Horn measure, which you may gulp down for a shilling. Upon entering the place I found a number of young seamen gathered about a table, examining by a dim light 16 MOBY-DICK divers speiimens of skrimshander. I sought the land- lord, and telling him I desired to be accommodated with a room, received for answer that his house was full not a bed unoccupied. ' But avast, 5 he added, tapping his forehead, ' you hain't no objections to sharin* a har- pooneer 's blanket, have ye ? I s'pose you are goin' a- whalin 5 , so you 'd better get used to that sort of thing. 5 I told him that I never liked to sleep two in a bed ; that if I should ever do so, it would depend upon who the harpooneer might be, and that if he (the landlord) really had no other place for me, and the harpooneer was not decidedly objectionable, why, rather than wander further about a strange town on so bitter a night, I would put up with the half of any decent man 5 s blanket. ' I thought so. All right ; take a seat. Supper ? you want supper ? Supper 5 11 be ready directly. 5 I sat down on an old wooden settle, carved all over like a bench on the Battery. At one end a ruminating tar was still further adorning it with his jack-knife, stooping over and diligently working away at the space between his legs. He was trying his hand at a ship under full sail, but he didn't make much headway, I thought. At last some four or five of us were summoned to our meal in an adjoining room. It was cold as Iceland no fire at all the landlord said he couldn't afford it. Nothing but two dismal tallow candles, each in a winding sheet. We were fain to button up our monkey-jackets, and hold to our lips cups of scalding tea with our half- frozen fingers. But the fare was of the most substantial kind not only meat and potatoes, but dumplings ; good heavens ! dumplings for supper ! One young fellow in a green box-coat addressed himself to these dumplings hi a most direful manner. ' My boy,' said the landlord, ' you '11 have the night- mare to a dead sartainty.' THE SPOUTER-INN 17 'Landlord,' I whispered, w that ain't the harpooneer, is it ? ' 1 Oh, no/ said he, looking a sort of diabolically funny, 4 the harpooneer is a dark - complexioned chap. He never eats dumplings, he don't he eats nothing but steaks, and likes 'em rare.' ' The devil he does, ' says I. ' Where is that harpooneer ? Is he here ? ' ' He '11 be here afore long,' was the answer. I could not help it, but I began to feel suspicious of this ' dark-complexioned ' harpooneer. At any rate, I made up my mind that if it so turned out that we should sleep together, he must undress and get into bed before I did. Supper over, the company went back to the bar-room, when, knowing not what else to do with myself, I resolved to spend the rest of the evening as a looker-on. Presently a rioting noise was heard without. Starting up, the landlord cried, ' That 's the Grampus's crew. I seed her reported in the offing this morning ; a three years' voyage, and a full ship. Hurrah, boys ; now we '11 have the latest news from the Feegees.' A tramping of sea-boots was heard in the entry ; the door was flung open, and in rolled a wild set of mariners enough. Enveloped in their shaggy watch-coats, and with their heads muffled in woollen comforters, all be- darned and ragged, and their beards stiff with icicles, they seemed an eruption of bears from Labrador. They had just landed from their boat, and this was the first house they entered. No wonder, then, that they made a straight wake for the whale's mouth the bar when the wrinkled little old Jonah, there officiating, soon poured them out brimmers all round. One complained of a bad cold in his head, upon which Jonah mixed him a pitch-like potion of gin and molasses, which he VOL. I. B 18 MOBY-DICK swore was a sovereign cure for all colds and catarrhs whatsoever, never mind of how long standing, or whether caught off the coast of Labrador, or on the weather-side of an ice -island. The liquor soon mounted into their heads, as it generally does even with the arrantest topers newly landed from sea, and they began capering about most obstreperously. I observed, however, that one of them held somewhat aloof, and though he seemed desirous not to spoil the hilarity of his shipmates by his own sober face, yet upon the whole he refrained from making as much noise as the rest. This man interested me at once ; and since the sea- gods had ordained that he should soon become my ship- mate (though but a sleeping-partner one, so far as this narrative is concerned), I will here venture upon a little description of him. He stood full six feet in height, with noble shoulders, and a chest like a coffer-dam. I have seldom seen such brawn in a man. His face was deeply brown and burnt, making his white teeth dazzling by the contrast ; while in the deep shadows of his eyes floated some reminiscences that did not seem to give him much joy. His voice at once announced that he was a Southerner, and from his fine stature, I thought he must be one of those tall mountaineers from the Alleghanian Ridge in Virginia. When the revelry of his companions had mounted to its height, this man slipped away unob- served, and I saw no more of him till he became my comrade on the sea. In a few minutes, however, he was missed by his shipmates, and being, it seems, for some reason a huge favourite with them, they raised a cry of ' Bulkington ! Bulkington ! where 5 s Bulkington ? ' and darted out of the house in pursuit of him. It was now about nine o'clock, and the room seeming almost supernaturally quiet after these orgies, I began THE SPOUTER-INN 19 to congratulate myself upon a little plan that had occurred to me just previous to the entrance of the seamen. No man prefers to sleep two in a bed. In fact, you would a good deal rather not sleep with your own brother. I don't know how it is, but people like to be private when they are sleeping. And when it comes to sleeping with an unknown stranger, in a strange inn, in a strange town, and that stranger a harpooneer, then your objections indefinitely multiply. Nor was there any earthly reason why I as a sailor should sleep two in a bed, more than anybody else ; for sailors no more sleep two in a bed at sea, than bachelor kings do ashore. To be sure, they all sleep together in one apartment, but you have your own hammock, and cover yourself with your own blanket, and sleep in your own skin. The more I pondered over this harpooneer, the more I abominated the thought of sleeping with him. It was fair to presume that being a harpooneer, his linen or woollen, as the case might be, would not be of the tidiest, certainly none of the finest. I began to twitch all over. Besides, it was getting late, and my decent harpooneer ought to be home and going bedward. Suppose now, he should tumble in upon me at midnight how could I tell from what vile hole he had been coming ? ' Landlord ! I Ve changed my mind about that harpooneer. I shan't sleep with him. I '11 try the bench here.' ' Just as you please ; I 'm sorry I can't spare ye a tablecloth for a mattress, and it 's a plaguy rough board here ' feeling of the knots and notches. ' But wait a bit, Skrimshander ; I Ve got a carpenter's plane there in the bar wait, I say, and I '11 make ye snug enough.' So saying he procured the plane ; and with his old silk handkerchief first dusting the bench, vigorously set to planing away at my bed, the while grinning like an ape. 20 MOBY-DICK The shavings flew right and left ; till at last the plane- iron came bump against an indestructible knot. The landlord was near spraining his wrist, and I told him for heaven's sake to quit the bed was soft enough to suit me, and I did not know how all the planing in the world could make eider down of a pine plank. So gathering up the shavings with another grin, and throwing them into the great stove in the middle of the room, he went about his business, and left me in a brown study. I now took the measure of the bench, and found that it was a foot too short ; but that could be mended with a chair. But it was a foot too narrow, and the other bench in the room was about four inches higher than the planed one so there was no yoking them. I then placed the first bench lengthwise along the only clear space against the wall, leaving a little interval between, for my back to settle down in. But I soon found that there came such a draught of cold air over me from under the sill of the window, that this plan would never do at all, especially as another current from the rickety door met the one from the window, and both together formed a series of small whirlwinds in the immediate vicinity of the spot where I had thought to spend the night. The devil fetch that harpooneer, thought I, but stop, couldn't I steal a march on him bolt his door inside, and jump into his bed, not to be wakened by the most violent knockings ? It seemed no bad idea ; but upon second thoughts I dismissed it. For who could tell but what the next morning, so soon as I popped out of the room, the harpooneer might be standing in the entry, all ready to knock me down ! Still, looking round me again, and seeing no possible chance of spending a sufferable night unless in some other person's bed, I began to think that after all I might be cherishing unwarrantable prejudices against this unknown THE SPOQTER-INN 21 harpooneer. Thinks I, I '11 wait awhile ; he must be dropping in before long. 1 11 have a good look at him then, and perhaps we may become jolly good bedfellows after all there 's no telling. But though the other boarders kept coming in by ones, twos, and threes, and going to bed, yet no sign of my harpooneer. 4 Landlord ! ' said I, ' what sort of a chap is he does he always keep such late hours ? ' It was now hard upon twelve o'clock. The landlord chuckled again with his lean chuckle, and seemed to be mightily tickled at something beyond my comprehension. ' No,' he answered, ' generally he 5 s an early bird airley to bed and airley to rise yes, he 's the bird what catches the worm. But to-night he went out a-peddling, you see, and I don't see what on airth keeps him so late, unless, maybe, he can't sell his head.' ' Can't sell his head ? What sort of a bamboozingly story is this you are telling me ? ' getting into a tower- ing rage. ' Do you pretend to say, landlord, that this harpooneer is actually engaged this blessed Saturday night, or rather Sunday morning, in peddling his head around this town ? ' ' That 's precisely it,' said the landlord, ' and I told him he couldn't sell it here, the market 's overstocked.' ' With what ? ' shouted I. ' With heads, to be sure ; ain't there too many heads in the world ? ' ' I tell you what it is, landlord,' said I, quite calmly, ' you 'd better stop spinning that yarn to me I 'm not green.' 6 Maybe not, ' taking out a stick and whittling a tooth- pick, ' but I rayther guess you '11 be done brown if that 'ere harpooneer hears you a-slanderin' his head.' 22 MOBY-DICK ' I '11 break it for him/ said I, now flying into a passion again at this unaccountable farrago of the landlord's. ' It 's broke a 'ready,' said he. ' Broke/ said I ' broke, do you mean ? ' ' Sartain, and that 's the very reason he can't sell it, I guess.' ' Landlord/ said I, going up to him as cool as Mt. Hecla in a snow-storm, 'landlord, stop whittling. You and I must understand one another, and that too without delay. I come to your house and want a bed ; you tell me you can only give me half a one ; that the other half belongs to a certain harpooneer. And about this har- pooneer, whom I have not yet seen, you persist in telling me the most mystifying and exasperating stories, tending to beget in me an uncomfortable feeling toward the man whom you design for my bedfellow* a sort of connection, landlord, which is an intimate and confidential one in the highest degree. I now demand of you to speak out and tell me who and what this harpooneer is, and whether I shall be in all respects safe to spend the night with him. And in the first place, you will be so good as to unsay that story about selling his head, which if true I take to be good evidence that this harpooneer is stark mad, and I 've no idea of sleeping with a madman ; and you, sir, you I mean, landlord, you, sir, by trying to induce me to do so knowingly, would thereby render yourself liable to a criminal prosecution.' ' Wall/ said the landlord, fetching a long breath, 'that 's a purty long sarmon for a chap that rips a little now and then. But be easy, be easy, this here harpooneer I have been tellin' you of has just arrived from the South Seas, where he bought up a lot of 'balmed New Zealand heads (great curios, you know), and he 's sold all on 'em but one, and that one he 's tryin' to sell to-night, cause to- morrow 's Sunday, and it would not do to be sellin' THE SPOUTER-INN 23 human heads about the streets when folks is goin' to churches. He wanted to, last Sunday, but I stopped him just as he was goin' out of the door with four heads strung on a string, for all the airth like a string of inions.' This account cleared up the otherwise unaccountable mystery, and showed that the landlord, after all, had had no idea of fooling me but at the same time what could I think of a harpooneer who stayed out of a Saturday night clean into the holy Sabbath, engaged in such a cannibal business as selling the heads of dead idolaters ? ' Depend upon it, landlord, that harpooneer is a danger- ous man.' ' He pays reg'lar, 5 was the rejoinder. ' But come, it 's getting dreadful late, you had better be turning flukes it 's a nice bed : Sail and me slept in that 'ere bed the night we were spliced. There 's plenty room for two to kick about in that bed ; it 's an almighty big bed that. Why, afore we give it up, Sal used to put our Sam and little Johnny in the foot of it. But I got a-dreaming and sprawling about one night, and somehow, Sam got pitched on the floor, and came near breaking his arm. Arter that, Sal said it wouldn't do. Come along here, I '11 give ye a glim in a jiffy ' ; and so saying he lighted a candle and held it toward me, offering to lead the way. But I stood irresolute ; when looking at a clock in the corner, he exclaimed, ' I vum it 's Sunday you won't see that harpooneer to-night ; he 's come to anchor some- where come along then ; do come ; won't ye come ? ' I considered the matter a moment, and then upstairs we went, and I was ushered into a small room, cold as a clam, and furnished, sure enough, with a prodigious bed, almost big enough indeed for any four harpooneers to sleep abreast. ' There,' said the landlord, placing the candle on a crazy old sea-chest that did double duty as a wash-stand 24 MOBY-DICK and centre table ; ' there, make yourself comfortable now, and good night to ye.' I turned round from eyeing the bed, but he had disappeared. Folding back the counterpane, I stooped over the bed. Though none of the most elegant, it yet stood the scrutiny tolerably well. I then glanced round the room ; and besides the bedstead and centre table, could see no other furniture belonging to the place, but a rude shelf, the four walls, and a papered fire-board representing a man striking a whale. Of things not properly belonging to the room, there was a hammock lashed up, and thrown upon the floor in one corner ; also a large seaman's bag, containing the harpooneer's wardrobe, no doubt in lieu of a land trunk. Likewise, there was a parcel of outlandish bone fish-hooks on the shelf over the fire-place, and a tall harpoon stand- ing at the head of the bed. But what is this on the chest ? I took it up, and held it close to the light, and felt it, and smelt it, and tried every way possible to arrive at some satisfactory con- clusion concerning it. I can compare it to nothing but a large door-mat, ornamented at the edges with little tinkling tags something like the stained porcupine quills round an Indian moccasin. There was a hole or slit in the middle of this mat, as you see the same in South American ponchos. But could it be possible that any sober harpooneer would get into a door-mat, and parade the streets of any Christian town in that sort of guise ? I put it on, to try it, and it weighed me down like a hamper, being uncommonly shaggy and thick, and I thought a little damp, as though this mysterious harpooneer had been wearing it of a rainy day. I went up in it to a bit of glass stuck against the wall, and I never saw such a sight in my life. I tore myself out of it in such a hurry that I gave myself a kink in the neck. I sat down on the side of the bed, and commenced THE SPOUTER-INN 25 thinking about this head-peddling harpooneer, and his door-mat. After thinking some time on the bedside, I got up and took off my monkey-jacket, and then stood in the middle of the room thinking. I then took off my coat, and thought a little more in my shirt -sleeves. But beginning to feel very cold now, half undressed as I was, and remembering what the landlord said about the har- pooneer 's not coming home at all that night, it being so very late, I made no more ado, but jumped out of my pantaloons and boots, and then blowing out the light tumbled into bed, and commended myself to the care of heaven. Whether that mattress was stuffed with corn-cobs or broken crockery, there is no telling, but I rolled about a good deal, and could not sleep for a long time. At last I slid off into a light doze, and had pretty nearly made a good offing toward the land of Nod, when I heard a heavy footfall in the passage, and saw a glimmer of light come into the room from under the door. Lord save me, thinks I, that must be the harpooneer, the infemal head-peddler. But I lay perfectly still, and resolved not to say a word till spoken to. Holding a light in one hand, and that identical New Zealand head in the other, the stranger entered the room, and without looking toward the bed, placed his candle a good way off from me on the floor in one corner, and then began working away at the knotted cords of the large bag I before spoke of as being in the room. I was all eagerness to see his face, but he kept it averted for some time while employed in unlacing the bag 's mouth . This accomplished, however, he turned round when, good heavens ! what a sight ! Such a face ! It was of a dark, purplish, yellow colour, here and there stuck over with large, blackish- looking squares. Yes, it 's just as I thought, he 's a terrible bedfellow ; he 's been in a fight, got dreadfully 26 MOBY-DICK cut, and here he is, just from the surgeon. But at that moment he chanced to turn his face so toward the light, that I plainly saw they could not be sticking-plasters at all, those black squares on his cheeks. They were stains of some sort or other. At first I knew not what to make of this ; but soon an inkling of the truth occurred to me. I remembered a story of a white man a whaleman too who, falling among the cannibals, had been tattooed by them. I concluded that this harpooneer, in the course of his distant voyages, must have met with a similar adven- ture. And what is it, thought I, after all ! It 's only his outside ; a man can be honest in any sort of skin. But then, what to make of his unearthly complexion, that part of it, I mean, lying round about, and completely independent of the squares of tattooing. To be sure, it might be nothing but a good coat of tropical tanning ; but I never heard of a hot sun's tanning a white man into a purplish-yellow one. However, I had never been in the South Seas ; and perhaps the sun there produced these extraordinary effects upon the skin. Now, while all these ideas were passing through me like lightning, this harpooneer never noticed me at all. But, after some difficulty having opened his bag, he commenced fumbling in it, and presently pulled out a sort of tomahawk, and a sealskin wallet with the hair on. Placing these on the old chest in the middle of the room, he then took the New Zealand head a ghastly thing enough and crammed it down into the bag. He now took off his hat a new beaver hat when I came nigh singing out with fresh surprise. There was no hair on his head none to speak of, at least nothing but a small scalp -knot twisted up on his forehead. His bald purplish head now looked for all the world like a mildewed skull. Had not the^stranger stood between me and the door, I would have bolted out of it quicker than ever I bolted a dinner. THE SPOUTER-INN 27 Even as it was, I thought something of slipping out of the window, but it was the second floor back. I am no coward, but what to make of this head-peddling purple rascal altogether passed my comprehension. Ignorance, js^the parent^QJJear, and being completely nonplussed and confounded about the stranger, I confess I was now as much afraid of him as if it was the devil himself who had thus broken into my room at the dead of night. In fact, I was so afraid of him that I was not game enough just then to address him, and demand a satisfactory answer concerning what seemed inexplicable in him. Meanwhile, he continued the business of undressing, and at last showed his chest and arms. As I live, these covered parts of him were checkered with the same squares as his face ; his back, too, was all over the same dark squares ; he seemed to have been in a Thirty Years' War, and just escaped from it with a sticking-plaster shirt. Still more, his very legs were marked, as if a parcel of dark green frogs were running up the trunks of young palms. It was now quite plain that he must be some abominable savage or other shipped aboard of a whale- man in the South Seas, and so landed in this Christian country. I quaked to think of it. A peddler of heads too perhaps the heads of his own brothers. He might take a fancy to mine heavens ! look at that tomahawk ! But there was no time for shuddering, for now the savage went about something that completely fascinated my attention, and convinced me that he must indeed be a heathen. Going to his heavy grego, or wrapall, or dreadnaught, which he had previously hung on a chair, he fumbled in the pockets, and produced at length a curious little deformed image with a hunch on its back, and exactly the colour of a three-days-old Congo baby. Remembering the embalmed head, at first I almost thought that this black manikin was a real baby pre- 28 MOBY-DICK served in some similar manner. But seeing that it was not at all limber, and that it glistened a good deal like polished ebony, I concluded that it must be nothing but a wooden idol, which indeed it proved to be. For now the savage goes up to the empty fire-place, and removing the papered fire -board, sets up this little hunchbacked image, like a ten-pin, between the andirons. The chimney jambs and all the bricks inside were very sooty, so that I thought this fire-place made a very appropriate little shrine or chapel for his Congo idol. I now screwed my eyes hard toward the half-hidden image, feeling but ill at ease meantime to see what was next to follow. First he takes about a double handful of shavings out of his grego pocket, and places them carefully before the idol ; then laying a bit of ship -biscuit on top and applying the flame from the lamp, he kindled <the shavings into a sacrificial blaze. Presently, after many hasty snatches into the fire, and still hastier with- drawals of his fingers (whereby he seemed to be scorching them badly), he at last succeeded in drawing out the biscuit ; then blowing off the heat and ashes a little, he made a polite offer of it to the little negro. But the little devil did not seem to fancy such dry sort of fare at all ; he never moved his lips. All these strange antics were accompanied by still stranger guttural noises from the devotee, who seemed to be praying in a sing-song or else singing some pagan psalmody or other, during which his face twitched about in the most unnatural manner. At last, extinguishing the fire, he took the idol up very unceremoniously, and bagged it again in his grego pocket as carelessly as if he were a sportsman bagging a dead woodcock. All these queer proceedings increased my uncomf ortable- ness, and seeing him now exhibiting strong symptoms of concluding his business operations, and jumping into bed THE SPOUTER-INN 29 with me, I thought it was high time, now or never, before the light was put out, to break the spell in which I had so long been bound. But the interval I spent in deliberating what to say was a fatal one. Taking up his tomahawk from the table, he examined the head of it for an instant, and then hold- ing it to the light, with his mouth at the handle, he puffed out great clouds of tobacco smoke. The next moment the light was extinguished, and this wild cannibal, toma- hawk between his teeth, sprang into bed with me. I sang out, I could not help it now ; and giving a sudden grunt of astonishment he began feeling me. Stammering out something, I knew not what, I rolled away from him against the wall, and then conjured him, whoever or whatever he might be, to keep quiet, and let me get up and light the lamp again. But his guttural responses satisfied me at once that he but ill compre- hended my meaning. ' Who-e debel you ? ' he at last said ' you no speak-e, dam-me, I kill-e.' And so saying the lighted tomahawk began flourishing about me in the dark. 4 Landlord, for God's sake, Peter Coffin ! ' shouted I. ' Landlord ! Watch ! Coffin ! Angels ! save me ! ' 1 Speak-e ! tell-ee me who-ee be, or dam-me, I kill-e ! ' again growled the cannibal, while his horrid flourishings of the tomahawk scattered the hot tobacco ashes about me till I thought my linen would get on fire. But thank heaven, at that moment the landlord came into the room light in hand, and leaping from the bed I ran up to him. 4 Don't be afraid now,' said he, grinning again. ' Quee- queg here wouldn't harm a hair of your head.' ' Stop your grinning,' shouted I, ' and why didn't you tell me that that infernal harpooneer was a cannibal ? ' ' I thought ye know'd it ; didn't I tell ye, he was a-peddlin' heads around town ? but turn flukes again 30 MOBY-DICK and go to sleep. Queequeg, look here you sabbee me, I sabbee you this man sleepe you you sabbee ? ' ' Me sabbee plenty,' grunted Queequeg, puffing away at his pipe and sitting up in bed. ' You gettee in/ he added, motioning to me with his tomahawk, and throwing the clothes to one side. He really did this in not only a civil but a really kind and charitable way. I stood looking at him a moment. For all his tattooings he was on the whole a clean, comely- looking cannibal. What 's all this fuss I have been making about, thought I to myself the man ? s a human being just as I am : he has just as much reason to fear me, as I have to be afraid of him. Better sleep with a sober cannibal than a drunken Christian. 'Landlord,' said I, 'tell him to stash his tomahawk there, or pipe, or whatever you call it ; tell him to stop smoking, in short, and I will turn in with him. But I don't fancy having a man smoking in bed with me. It 's dangerous. Besides, I ain't insured.' This being told to Queequeg, he at once complied, and again politely motioned me to get into bed rolling over to one side as much as to say, I won't touch a leg of ye. ' Good night, landlord,' said I, ' you may go.' I turned in, and never slept better in my life. CHAPTER IV THE COUNTERPANE UPON waking next morning about daylight, I found Queequeg's arm thrown over me in the most loving and affectionate manner. You had almost thought I had been his wife. The counterpane was of patchwork, full of odd little parti-coloured squares and triangles ; and this arm of his tattooed all over with an interminable Cretan labyrinth of a figure, no two parts of which were of one precise shade owing, I suppose, to his keeping his arm at sea unmethodically in sun and shade, his shirt-sleeves irregularly rolled up at various times this same arm of his, I say, looked for all the world like a strip of that same patchwork quilt. Indeed, partly lying on it as the arm did when I first awoke, I could hardly tell it from the quilt, they so blended their hues together ; and it was only by the sense of weight and pressure that I could tell that Queequeg was hugging me. My sensations were strange. Let me try to explain them. When I was a child, I well remember a somewhat similar circumstance that befell me ; whether it was a reality or a dream, I never could entirely settle. The circumstance was this. I had been cutting up some caper or other I think it was trying to crawl up the chimney, as I had seen a little sweep do a few days previous ; and my stepmother, who, somehow or other, was all the time whipping me, or sending me to bed supperless, my mother dragged me by the legs out of the chimney and packed me off to bed, though it was only two o'clock in the afternoon of the 21st June, the 31 32 MOBY-DICK longest day in the year in our hemisphere. 1 felt dread- fully. But there was no help for it, so upstairs I went to my little room in the third floor, undressed myself as slowly as possible so as to kill time, and with a bitter sigh got between the sheets. I lay there dismally calculating that sixteen entire hours must elapse before I could hope for a resurrection. Sixteen hours in bed ! the small of my back ached to think of it. And it was so light too ; the sun shining in at the window, and a great rattling of coaches in the streets, and the sound of gay voices all over the house. I felt worse and worse at last I got up, dressed, and softly going down in my stockinged feet, sought out my stepmother, and suddenly threw myself at her feet, be- seeching her as a particular favour to give me a good slippering for my misbehaviour ; anything indeed but con- demning me to lie abed such an unendurable length of time. But she was the best and most conscientious of stepmothers, and back I had to go to my room. For several hours I lay there broad awake, feeling a great deal worse than I have ever done since, even from the greatest subsequent misfortunes. At last I must have fallen into a troubled nightmare of a doze ; and slowly waking from it half steeped in dreams I opened my eyes, and the before sunlit room was now wrapped in outer darkness. Instantly I felt a shock running through all my frame ; nothing was to be seen, and nothing was to be heard ; but a supernatural hand seemed placed in mine. My arm hung over the counterpane, and the nameless, unimaginable, silent form or phantom, to which the hand belonged, seemed closely seated by my bedside. For what seemed ages piled on ages, I lay there, frozen with the most awful fears, not daring to drag away my hand ; yet ever thinking that if I could but stir it one single inch, the horrid spell would be broken. I knew THE COUNTERPANE 33 not how this consciousness at last glided away from me ; but waking in the morning, I shudderingly remembered it all, and for days and weeks and months afterward I lost myself in confounding attempts to explain the mystery. Nay, to this very hour, I often puzzle myself with it. Now, take away the awful fear, and my sensations at feeling the supernatural hand in mine were very similar, in their strangeness, to those which I experienced on waking up and seeing Queequeg 's pagan arm thrown round me. But at length all the past night's events soberly recurred, one by one, in fixed reality, and then I lay only alive to the comical predicament. For though I tried to move his arm unlock his bridegroom clasp yet, sleeping as he was, he still hugged me tightly, as though naught but death should part us twain. I now strove to rouse him * Queequeg ! ' but his only answer was a snore. I then rolled over, my neck feeling as if it were in a horse-collar ; and suddenly felt a slight scratch. Throwing aside the counterpane, there lay the tomahawk sleeping by the savage's side, as if it were a hatchet -faced baby. A pretty pickle, truly, thought I ; abed here in a strange house in the broad day, with a cannibal and a tomahawk ! ' Queequeg ! in the name of goodness, Queequeg, wake ! ' At length, by dint of much wriggling, and loud and incessant expostulations upon the unbecomingness of his hugging a fellow-male in that matrimonial sort of style, I succeeded in extracting a grunt ; and presently, he drew back his arm, shook himself all over like a Newfoundland dog just from the water, and sat up in bed, stiff as a pikestaff, looking at me, and rubbing his eyes as if he did not altogether re- member how I came to be there, though a dim conscious- ness of knowing something about me seemed slowly dawning over him. Meanwhile, I lay quietly eyeing him, having no serious misgivings now, and bent upon narrowly VOL. i. c 34 MOBY-DICK observing so curious a creature. When, at last, his mind seemed made up touching the character of his bed- fellow, and he became, as it were, reconciled to the fact, he jumped out upon the floor, and by certain signs and sounds gave me to understand that, if it pleased me, he would dress first and then leave me to dress afterward, leaving the whole apartment to myself. Thinks I, Queequeg, under the circumstances, this is a very civilised overture ; but, the truth is, these savages have an innate sense of delicacy, say what you will ; it is marvellous how essentially polite they are. I pay this particular compli- ment to Queequeg, because he treated me with so much civility and consideration, while I was guilty of great rudeness ; staring at him from the bed, and watching all his toilet motions ; for the time my curiosity getting the better of my breeding. Nevertheless, a man like Quee- queg you don't see every day, he and his ways were well worth unusual regarding. He commenced dressing at top by donning his beaver hat, a very tall one, by the by, and then still minus his trowsers he hunted up his boots. What under the heavens he did it for, I cannot tell, but his next movement was to crush himself boots in hand, and hat on under the bed ; when, from sundry violent gaspings and strain- ings, I inferred he was hard at work booting himself ; though by no law of propriety that I ever heard of is any man required to be private when putting on his boots. But Queequeg, do you see, was a creature in the transi- tion state neither caterpillar nor butterfly. He was just enough civilised to show off his outlandishness in the strangest possible manner. His education was not yet completed. He was an undergraduate. If he had not been a small degree civilised, he very probably would not have troubled himself with boots at all ; but then, if he had not been still a savage, he never would have THE COUNTERPANE 35 dreamt of getting under the bed to put them on. At last, he emerged with his hat very much dented and crushed down over his eyes, and began creaking and limping about the room, as if, not being much accustomed to boots, his pair of damp, wrinkled cowhide ones pro- bably not made to order either rather pinched and tormented him at the first go off of a bitter cold morning. Seeing, now, that there were no curtains to the window, and that the street being very narrow, the house opposite commanded a plain view into the room, and observing more and more the indecorous figure that Queequeg made, staving about with little else but his hat and boots on, I begged him as well as I could, to accelerate his toilet somewhat, and particularly to get into his panta- loons as soon as possible. He complied, and then pro- ceeded to wash himself. At that time in the morning any Christian would have washed his face ; but Queequeg, to my amazement, contented himself with restricting his ablutions to his chest, arms, and hands. He then donned his waistcoat, and taking up a piece of hard soap on the wash-stand centre table, dipped it into water and commenced lathering his face. I was watching to see where he kept his razor, when lo and behold, he takes the harpoon from the bed corner, slips out the long wooden stock, unsheathes the head, whets it a little on his boot, and striding up to the bit of mirror against the wall, begins a vigorous scraping, or rather harpooning of his cheeks. Thinks I, Queequeg, this is using Rogers's best cutlery with a vengeance. Afterward I wondered the less at this operation when I came to know of what fine steel the head of a harpoon is made, and how exceedingly sharp the long straight edges are always kept. The rest of his toilet was soon achieved, and he proudly marched out of the room, wrapped up in his great pilot monkey-jacket, and sporting his harpoon like a marshal's baton. CHAPTER V BREAKFAST I QUICKLY followed suit, and descending into the bar-room accosted the grinning landlord very pleasantly. I cherished no malice toward him, though he had been skylarking with me not a little in the matter of my bedfellow. However, a good laugh is a mighty good thing, and rather too scarce a good thing ; the more 's the pity. So, if any one man, in his own proper person, afford stuff for a good joke to anybody, let him not be backward, but let him cheerfully allow himself to spend and be spent in that way. And the man that has anything bountifully laughable about him, be sure there is more in that man than you perhaps think for. The bar-room was now full of the boarders who had been dropping in the night previous, and whom I had not as yet had a good look at. They were nearly all whalemen ; chief mates, and second mates, and third mates, and sea- carpenters, and sea-coopers, and sea-blacksmiths, and harpooneers, and ship-keepers ; a brown and brawny company, with bosky beards ; an unshorn, shaggy set, all wearing monkey-jackets for morning gowns. You could pretty plainly tell how long each one had been ashore. This young fellow's healthy cheek is like a sun-toasted pear in hue, and would seem to smell almost as musky ; he cannot have been three days landed from his Indian voyage. That man next him looks a few shades lighter ; you might say a touch of satinwood 36 BREAKFAST 37 is in him. In the complexion of a third still lingers a tropic tawn, but slightly bleached withal ; lie doubtless has tarried whole weeks ashore. But who could show a cheek like Queequeg ? which, barred with various tints, seemed like the Andes' western slope, to show forth in one array, contrasting climates, zone by zone. ' Grub, ho ! ' now cried the landlord, flinging open a door, and in we went to breakfast. They say that men who have seen the world, thereby become quite at ease in manner, quite self-possessed in company. Not always, though : Ledyard, the great New England traveller, and Mungo Park, the Scotch one ; of all men, they possessed the least assurance in the parlour. But perhaps the mere crossing of Siberia in a sledge drawn by dogs as Ledyard did, or the taking a long solitary walk on an empty stomach, in the negro heart of Africa, which was the sum of poor Mungo 's performances this kind of travel, I say, may not be the very best mode of attaining a high social polish. Still, for the most part, that sort of thing is to be had anywhere. These reflections just here are occasioned by the cir- cumstance that after we were all seated at the table, and I was preparing to hear some good stories about whaling ; to my no small surprise nearly every man maintained a profound silence. And not only that, but they looked embarrassed. Yes, here were a set of sea-dogs, many of whom without the slightest bashfulness had boarded great whales on the high seas entire strangers to them and duelled them dead without winking ; and yet, here they sat at a social breakfast table all of the same calling, all of kindred tastes looking round as sheepishly at each other as though they had never been out of sight of some sheepfold among the Green Mountains. A curious sight ; these bashful bears, these timid warrior whalemen ! 38 MOBY-DICK But as for Queequeg why, Queequeg sat there among them at the head of the table, too, it so chanced as cool as an icicle. To be sure, I cannot say much for his breeding. His greatest admirer could not have cordially justified his bringing his harpoon in to breakfast with him, and using it there without ceremony ; reaching over the table with it, to the imminent jeopardy of many heads, and grappling the beefsteaks toward him. But that was certainly very coolly done by him, and everyone knows that in most people's estimation, to do anything coolly is to do it genteelly. We will not speak of all Queequeg's peculiarities here ; how he eschewed coffee and hot rolls, and applied his undivided attention to beefsteaks, done rare. Enough, that when breakfast was over he withdrew like the rest into the public room, lighted his tomahawk-pipe, and was sitting there quietly digesting and smoking with his inseparable hat on, when I sallied out for a stroll. CHAPTER VI THE STREET IF I had been astonished at first catching a glimpse of so outlandish an individual as Queequeg circulating among the polite society of a civilised town, that astonishment soon departed upon taking my first daylight stroll through the streets of New Bedford. In thoroughfares nigh the docks, any considerable sea- port will frequently offer to view the queerest -looking nondescripts from foreign parts. Even in Broadway and Chestnut Streets, Mediterranean mariners will some- times jostle the affrighted ladies. Regent Street is not unknown to Lascars and Malays ; and at Bombay, in the Apollo Green, live Yankees have often scared the natives. But New Bedford beats all Water Street and Wapping. In these last -mentioned haunts you see only sailors ; but in New Bedford actual cannibals stand chatting at street corners ; savages outright ; many of whom yet carry on their bones unholy flesh. It makes a stranger stare. But, besides the Feegeeans, Tongatabooarrs, Erro- manggoans, Pannangians, and Brighggians, and besides the wild specimens of the whaling -craft which unheeded reel about the streets, you will see other sights still more curious, certainly more comical. There weekly arrive in this town scores of green Vermonters and New Hamp- shire men, all athirst for gain and glory in the fishery. They are mostly young, of stalwart frames ; fellows who have felled forests, and now seek to drop the axe and snatch the whale-lance. Many are as green as the Green 40 MOBY-DICK Mountains whence they came. In some things you would think them but a few hours old. Look there ! that chap strutting round the corner. He wears a beaver hat and swallow-tailed coat, girdled with a sailor -belt and a sheath- knife. Here comes another with a sou '-wester and a bombazine cloak. No town-bred dandy will compare with a country-bred one I mean a downright bumpkin dandy a fellow that, in the dog-days, will mow his two acres in buckskin gloves for fear of tanning his hands. Now when a country dandy like this takes it into his head to make a distin- guished reputation, and joins the great whale-fishery, you should see the comical things he does upon reaching the seaport. In bespeaking his sea -out fit, he orders bell- buttons to his waistcoats ; straps to his canvas trowsers. Ah, poor Hay-Seed ! how bitterly will burst those straps in the first howling gale, when thou art driven, straps/ buttons, and all, down the throat of the tempest. But think not that this famous town has only har- pooneers, cannibals, and bumpkins to show her visitors. Not at all. Still New Bedford is a queer place. Had it not been for us whalemen, that tract of land would this day perhaps have been in as howling condition as the coast of Labrador. As it is, parts of her back country are enough to frighten one, they look so bony. The town itself is perhaps the dearest place to live in, hi all New England. It is a land of oil, true enough : but not like Caanan ; a land, also, of corn and wine. The streets do not run with milk ; nor in the spring-time do they pave them with fresh eggs. Yet, in spite of this, nowhere in all America will you find more patrician-like houses ; parks and gardens more opulent, than hi New Bedford. Whence came they ? how planted upon this once scraggy scoria of a country ? Go and gaze upon the iron emblematical harpoons THE STREET 41 round yonder lofty mansion, and your question will be answered. Yes ; all these brave houses and flowery gardens came from the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian oceans. One and all, they were harpooned and dragged up hither from the bottom of the sea. Can Herr Alexander per- form a feat like that ? In New Bedford, fathers, they say, give whales for dowers to their daughters, and portion off their nieces with a few porpoises apiece. You must go to New Bed- ford to see a brilliant wedding ; for, they say, they have reservoirs of oil in every house, and every night recklessly burn their lengths in spermaceti candles. In summer time, the town is sweet to see ; full of fine maples long avenues of green and gold. And in August, high in air, the beautiful and bountiful horse-chestnuts, candelabra-wise, proffer the passer-by their tapering upright cones of congregated blossoms. So omnipotent \ is art ; which in many a district of New Bedford has superinduced bright terraces of flowers upon the barren refuse rocks thrown aside at Creation's final day. And the women of New Bedford, they bloom like their own red roses. But roses only bloom in summer ; whereas the fine carnation of their cheeks is perennial as sunlight in the seventh heavens. Elsewhere match that bloom of theirs, ye cannot, save in Salem, where they tell me the young girls breathe such musk, their sailor sweet- hearts smell them miles off shore, as though they were drawing nigh the odorous Moluccas instead of the Puritanic sands. CHAPTER VII THE CHAPEL IN this same New Bedford there stands a Whaleman's Chapel, and few are the moody fishermen, shortly bound for the Indian Ocean or Pacific, who fail to make a Sunday visit to the spot. I am sure that I did not. Returning from my first morning stroll, I again sallied out upon this special errand. The sky had changed from clear, sunny cold, to driving sleet and mist. Wrapping myself in my shaggy jacket of the cloth called bearskin, I fought my way against the stubborn storm. Entering, I found a small scattered congregation of sailors, and sailors' wives and widows. A muffled silence reigned, only broken at times by the shrieks of the storm. Each silent worshipper seemed purposely sitting apart from the other, as if each silent grief were insular and incom- municable. The chaplain had not yet arrived ; and there these silent islands of men and women sat steadfastly eyeing several marble tablets, with black borders, masoned into the wall on either side the pulpit. Three of them ran something like the following, but I do not pretend to quote : SACRED OF JOHN TALBOT, Who, at the age of eighteen, was lost overboard, Near the Isle of Desolation, off Patagonia, November 1st, 1836. THIS TABLET Is erected to his Memory BY HIS SISTER. 42 THE CHAPEL 43 SACRED ^o tlje em orp OF ROBERT LONG, WILLIS ELLERY, NATHAN COLEMAN, WALTER CANNY, SETH MACY, AND SAMUEL GLEIG, Forming one of the boats' crews OF THE SHIP ELIZA, Who were towed out of sight by a Whale, On the Ofi-shore Ground in the PACIFIC, December 3lst, 1839. THIS MABBLB Is here placed by their surviving Shipmates SACKED Eo tfje OF The late CAPTAIN EZEKIEL HARDY, Who in the bows of his boat was killed by a Sperm Whale on the coast of Japan, August 3d, 1833. THIS TABLET Is erected to his Memory BY HIS WIDOW. Shaking off the sleet from my ice-glazed hat and jacket, I seated myself near the door, and turning sideways was surprised to see Queequeg near me. Affected by the solemnity of the scene, there was a wondering gaze of incredulous curiosity in his countenance. This savage was the only person present who seemed to notice my entrance ; because he was the only one who could not read, and, therefore, was not reading those frigid inscrip- tions on the wall. Whether any of the relatives of the 44 MOBY-DICK seamen whose names appeared there were now among the congregation, I knew not ; but so many are the unre- corded accidents in the fishery, and so plainly did several women present wear the countenance if not the trappings of some unceasing grief, that I feel sure that here before me were assembled those, in whose unhealing hearts the sight of those bleak tablets sympathetically caused the old wounds to bleed afresh. Oh ! ye whose dead lie buried beneath the green grass ; who standing among flowers can say here, here lies my beloved ; ye know not the desolation that broods in bosoms like these. What bitter blanks in those black- bordered marbles which cover no ashes ! What despair in those immovable inscriptions ! What deadly voids and unbidden infidelities in the lines that seem to gnaw upon all Faith, and refuse resurrections to the beings who have placelessly perished without a grave. As well might those tablets stand in the cave of Elephanta as here. Li what census of living creatures, the dead of mankind are included ; why it is that a universal proverb says of them, that they tell no tales, though containing more secrets than the Goodwin Sands ; how it is that to his name who yesterday departed for the other world, we prefix so significant and infidel a word, and yet do not thus entitle him, if he but embarks for the remotest Indies of this living earth ; why the Life Insurance Companies pay death-forfeitures upon immortals ; in what eternal, unstirring paralysis, and deadly, hopeless trance, yet lies antique Adam who died sixty round centuries ago ; how it is that we still refuse to be comforted for those who we nevertheless maintain are dwelling in unspeakable bliss ; why all the living so strive to hush all the dead ; wherefore but the rumour of a knocking in a tomb will terrify a whole city. All these things are not without their meanings. THE CHAPEL 45 But Faith, like a jackal, feeds among the tombs, and even from these dead doubts she gathers her most vital hope. It needs scarcely to be told, with what feelings, on the eve of a Nantucket voyage, I regarded those marble tablets, and by the murky light of that darkened, doleful day read the fate of the whalemen who had gone before me. Yes, Ishmael, the same fate may be thine. But somehow I grew merry again. Delightful inducements to embark, fine chance for promotion, it seems ay, a stove boat will make me an immortal by brevet. Yes, there is death in this business of whaling a speechlessly quick chaotic bundling of a man into Eternity. But what then ? Methinks we have hugely mistaken this matter of Life and Death. Methinks that what they call my shadow here on earth is my true substance. Methinks that in looking at things spiritual, we are too much like oysters observing the sun through the water, and thinking that thick water the thinnest of air. Methinks my body is but the lees of my better being. In fact, take my body who will, take it I say, it is not me. And therefore three cheers for Nantucket ; and come a stove boat and stove body when they will, for stave my soul, Jove himself cannot. CHAPTER VIII THE PULPIT I HAD not been seated very long ere a man of a certain venerable robustness entered ; immediately as the storm- pelted door flew back upon admitting him, a quick regard- ful eyeing of him by all the congregation sufficiently attested that this fine old man was the chaplain. Yes, it was the famous Father Mapple, so called by the whale- men, among whom he was a very great favourite. He had been a sailor and a harpooneer in his youth, but for many years past had dedicated his life to the ministry. At the time I now write of, Father Mapple was in the hardy winter of a healthy old age ; that sort of old age which seems merging into a second flowering youth, for among all the fissures of his wrinkles, there shone certain mild gleams of a newly developing bloom the spring verdure peeping forth even beneath February's snow. No one having previously heard his history, could for the first time behold Father Mapple without the utmost interest, because there were certain engrafted clerical peculiarities about him, imputable to that adventurous maritime life he had led. When he entered I observed that he carried no umbrella, and certainly had not come in his carriage, for his tarpaulin hat ran down with melting sleet, and his great pilot-cloth jacket seemed almost to drag him to the floor with the weight of the water it had absorbed. However, hat and coat and overshoes were one by one removed, and hung up in a little space in an adjacent corner ; when, arrayed in a decent suit, he quietly approached the pulpit. 46 THE PULPIT 47 Like most old-fashioned pulpits, it was a very lofty one, and since a regular stairs to such a height would, by its long angle with the floor, seriously contract the already small area of the chapel, the architect, it seemed, had acted upon the hint of Father Mapple, and finished the pulpit without a stairs, substituting a perpendicular side ladder, like those used in mounting a ship from a boat at sea. The wife of a whaling-captain had provided the chapel with a handsome pair of red worsted man-ropes for this ladder, which, being itself nicely headed, and stained with a mahogany colour, the whole contrivance, considering what manner of chapel it was, seemed by no means in bad taste. Halting for an instant at the foot of the ladder, and with both hands grasping the ornamental knobs of the man-ropes, Father Mapple cast a look upward, and then with a truly sailor-like but still reverential dexterity, hand over hand, mounted the steps as if ascending the main -top of his vessel. The perpendicular parts of this side ladder, as is usually the case with swinging ones, were of cloth-covered rope, only the rounds were of wood, so that at every step there was a joint. At my first glimpse of the pulpit, it had not escaped me that however convenient for a ship, these joints in the present instance seemed unnecessary. For I was not prepared to see Father Mapple after gaining the height, slowly turn round, and stooping over the pulpit, deliberately drag up the ladder step by step, till the whole was deposited within, leaving him impregnable in his little Quebec. I pondered some time without fully comprehending the reason for this. Father Mapple enjoyed such a wide reputation for sincerity and sanctity, that I could not suspect him of courting notoriety by any mere tricks of the stage. No, thought I, there must be some sober reason for this thing ; furthermore, it must symbolise 48 MOBY-DICK something unseen. Can it be, then, that by that act of physical isolation, he signifies his spiritual withdrawal for the time, from all outward worldly ties and connections ? Yes, for replenished with the meat and wine of the word, to the faithful man of God, this pulpit, I see, is a self- containing stronghold a lofty Ehrenbreitstein, with a perennial well of water within the walls. But the side ladder was not the only strange feature of the place, borrowed from the chaplain's former sea- farings. Between the marble cenotaphs on either hand of the pulpit, the wall which formed its back was adorned with a large painting representing a gallant ship beating against a terrible storm off a lee coast of black rocks and snowy breakers. But high above the flying scud and dark-rolling clouds, there floated a little isle of sunlight, from which beamed forth an angel's face ; and this bright face shed a distinct spot of radiance upon the ship's tossed deck, something like that silver plate now inserted into the Victory's plank where Nelson fell. ' Ah, noble ship/ the angel seemed to say, 'beat on, beat on, thou noble ship, and bear a hardy helm ; for lo ! the sun is breaking through ; the clouds are rolling off serenest azure is at hand.' Nor was the pulpit itself without a trace of the same sea -taste that had achieved the ladder and the picture. Its panelled front was in the likeness of a ship's bluff bows, and the Holy Bible rested on a projecting piece of scroll work, fashioned after a ship's fiddle -headed beak. What could be more full of meaning ? for the pulpit is ever this earth's foremost part ; all the rest comes in its rear ; the pulpit leads the world. From thence it is the storm of God's quick wrath is first descried, and the bow must bear the earliest brunt. From thence it is the God of breezes fair or foul is first invoked for favourable winds. Yes, the world 's a ship on its passage out, and not a voyage complete ; and the pulpit is its prow. CHAPTER IX THE SERMON FATHER MAPPLE rose, and in a mild voice of unassuming authority ordered the scattered people to condense. ' Starboard gangway, there ! side away to larboard larboard gangway to starboard ! Midships ! midships ! ' There was a low rumbling of heavy sea-boots among the benches, and a still slighter shuffling of women's shoes, and all was quiet again, and every eye on the preacher. He paused a little ; then kneeling in the pulpit's bows, folded his large brown hands across his chest, uplifted his closed eyes, and offered a prayer so deeply devout that he seemed kneeling and praying at the bottom of the sea. This ended, in prolonged solemn tones, like the continual tolling of a bell in a ship that is foundering at sea in a fog in such tones he commenced reading the following hymn ; but changing his manner toward the concluding stanzas, burst forth with a pealing exultation and joy : * The ribs and terrors in the whale Arched over me a dismal gloom, While all God's sun-lit waves rolled by, And lift me deepening down to doom. ' I saw the opening maw of hell, With endless pains and sorrows there ; Which none but they that feel can tell Oh, I was plunging to despair. VOL. I. D 50 MOBY-DICK 4 In black distress, I called my God, When I could scarce believe him mine, He bowed his ear to my complaints No more the whale did me confine. ' With speed he flew to my relief, As on a radiant dolphin borne ; Awful, yet bright, as lightning shone The face of my Deliverer God. ' My song for ever shall record That terrible, that joyful hour ; I give the glory to my God, His all the mercy and the power.' Nearly all joined in singing this hymn, which swelled high above the howling of the storm. A brief pause ensued ; the preacher slowly turned over the leaves of the Bible, and at last, folding his hand down upon the proper page, said : ' Beloved shipmates, clinch the last verse of the first chapter of Jonah " And God had pre- pared a great fish to swallow up Jonah." ' Shipmates, this book, containing only four chapters four yarns is one of the smallest strands in the mighty cable of the Scriptures. Yet what depths of the soul does Jonah's deep sea-line sound ! what a pregnant lesson to us is this prophet ! What a noble thing is that canticle in the fish's belly ! How billow-like and boisterously grand ! We feel the floods surging over us ; we sound with him to the kelpy bottom of the waters ; sea-weed and all the slime of the sea is about us ! But what is this lesson that the book of Jonah teaches ? Shipmates, it is a two- stranded lesson ; a lesson to us all as sinful men, and a lesson to me as a pilot of the living God. As sinful men, it is a lesson to us all, because it is a story of the sin, hard- heartedness, suddenly awakened fears, the swift punish- ! THE SERMON 51 ment, repentance, prayers, and finally the deliverance and joy of Jonah. As with all sinners among men, the sin of this son of Amittai was in his wilful disobedience of the command of God never mind now what that command was, or how conveyed which he found a hard command. But all the things that God would have us do are hard for us to do remember that and hence, He oftener com- mands us than endeavours to persuade. And if we obey God, we must disobey ourselves ; and it is in this dis- obeying ourselves, wherein the hardness of obeying God consists. ' With this sin of disobedience in him, Jonah still further flouts at God, by seeking to flee from Him. He thinks that a ship made by men will carry him into countries where God does not reign, but only the captains of this earth. He skulks about the wharves of Joppa, and seeks a ship that 's bound for Tarshish. There lurks, perhaps, a hitherto unheeded meaning here. By all accounts Tarshish could have been no other city than the modern Cadiz. That 's the opinion of learned men. And where is Cadiz, shipmates ? Cadiz is in Spain ; as far by water, from Joppa, as Jonah could possibly have sailed in those ancient days, when the Atlantic was an almost unknown sea. Because Joppa, the modern Jaffa, ship- mates, is on the most easterly coast of the Mediterranean, the Syrian ; and Tarshish or Cadiz more than two thousand miles to the westward from that, just outside the Straits of Gibraltar. See ye not then, shipmates, that Jonah sought to flee world- wide from God ? Miserable man ! Oh ! most contemptible and worthy of all scorn ; with slouched hat and guilty eye, skulking from his God ; prowling among the shipping like a vile burglar hastening to cross the seas. So disordered, self -condemning is his look, that had there been policemen in those days, Jonah, on the mere suspicion of something wrong, had been 52 MOBY-DICK arrested ere he touched a deck. How plainly he 's a fugitive ! no baggage, not a hat-box, valise, or carpet- bag, no friends accompany him to the wharf with their adieux. At last, after much dodging search, he finds the Tarshish ship receiving the last items of her cargo ; and as he steps on board to see its captain in the cabin, all the sailors for the moment desist from hoisting in the goods, to mark the stranger's evil eye. Jonah sees this ; but in vain he tries to look ah 1 ease and confidence ; in vain essays his wretched smile. Strong intuitions of the man assure the mariners he can be no innocent. In their gamesome but still serious way, one whispers to the other " Jack, he 's robbed a widow " ; or, " Joe, do you mark him ; he 's a bigamist " ; or, " Harry, lad, I guess he 's the adulterer that broke jail in old Gomorrah, or belike, one of the missing murderers from Sodom." Another runs to read the bill that 's stuck against the spile upon the wharf to which the ship is moored, offering five hundred gold coins for the apprehension of a. parricide, and con- taining a description of his person. He reads, and looks from Jonah to the bill ; while all his sympathetic ship- mates now crowd round Jonah, prepared to lay their hands upon him. Frighted Jonah trembles, and summon- ing all his boldness to his face, only looks so much the more a coward. He will not confess himself suspected ; but that itself is strong suspicion. So he makes the best of it ; and when the sailors find him not to be the man that is advertised, they let him pass, and he descends into the cabin. ' " Who 's there ? " cries the captain at his busy desk, hurriedly making out his papers for the Customs "Who 's there ? " Oh ! how that harmless question mangles Jonah ! For the instant he almost turns to flee again. But he rallies. " I seek a passage in this ship to Tarshish ; how soon sail ye, sir ? " Thus far the busy captain had THE SERMON 53 not looked up to Jonah, though the man now stands before him ; but no sooner does he hear that hollow voice, than he darts a scrutinising glance. " We sail with the next coming tide," at last he slowly answered, still intently eyeing him. " No sooner, sir ? " " Soon enough for any honest man that goes a passenger." Ha ! Jonah, that 's another stab. But he swiftly calls away the captain from that scent. " I '11 sail with ye," he says, " the passage money, how much is that ? I '11 pay now." For it is particularly written, shipmates, as if it were a thing not to be overlooked in this history, " that he paid the fare thereof " ere the craft did sail. And taken with the context, this is full of meaning. ' Now Jonah's captain, shipmates, was one whose dis- cernment detects crime in any, but whose cupidity exposes it only in the penniless. In this world, shipmates, sin that pays its way can travel freely, and without a pass- port ; whereas Virtue, if a pauper, is stopped at all frontiers. So Jonah's captain prepares to test the length of Jonah's purse, ere he judge him openly. He charges him thrice the usual sum ; and it 's assented to. Then the captain knows that Jonah is a fugitive ; but at the same time resolves to help a flight that paves its rear with gold. Yet when Jonah fairly takes out his purse, prudent suspicions still molest the captain. He rings every coin to find a counterfeit. Not a forger, anyway, he mutters ; and Jonah is put down for his passage. " Point out my state-room, sir," says Jonah now, " I 'm travel- weary ; I need sleep." "Thou look'st like it," says the captain, " there 's thy room." Jonah enters, and would lock the door, but the lock contains no key. Hearing him foolishly fumbling there, the captain laughs lowly to himself, and mutters something about the doors of convicts' cells being never allowed to be locked within. All dressed and dusty as he is, Jonah throws himself into his berth, and finds 54 MOBY-DICK the little state-room ceiling almost resting on his forehead. The air is close, and Jonah gasps. Then, in that con- tracted hole, sunk, too, beneath the ship's water-line, Jonah feels the heralding presentiment of that stifling hour, when the whale shall hold him in the smallest of his bowel's wards. ' Screwed at its axis against the side, a swinging lamp slightly oscillates in Jonah's room ; and the ship, heeling over toward the wharf with the weight of the last bales received, the lamp, flame and all, though in slight motion, still maintains a permanent obliquity with reference to the room ; though, in truth, infallibly straight itself, it but made obvious the false, lying levels among which it hung. The lamp alarms and frightens Jonah ; as lying in his berth his tormented eyes roll round the place, and this thus far successful fugitive finds no refuge for his restless glance. But that contradiction in the lamp more and more appals him. The floor, the ceiling, and the side, are all awry. " Oh ! so my conscience hangs in me ! " he groans, " straight upward, so it burns ; but the chambers of my soul are all in crookedness ! " ' Like one who after a night of drunken revelry hies to his bed, still reeling, but with conscience yet pricking him, as the plungings of the Roman race -horse but so much the more strike his steel tags into him ; as one who in that miserable plight still turns and turns in giddy anguish, praying God for annihilation until the fit be passed ; and at last amid the whirl of woe he feels, a deep stupor steals over him, as over the man who bleeds to death, for conscience is the wound, and there 's naught to staunch it ; so, after sore wrestlings in his berth, Jonah's prodigy of ponderous misery drags him drowning down to sleep. c And now the time of tide has come ; the ship casts off her cables ; and from the deserted wharf the un- THE SERMON 55 cheered ship for Tarshish, all careening, glides to sea. That ship, my friends, was the first of recorded smugglers ! the contraband was Jonah. But the sea rebels ; he will not bear the wicked burden. A dreadful storm comes on, the ship is like to break. But now when the boatswain calls all hands to lighten her ; when boxes, bales, and jars are clattering overboard ; when the wind is shrieking, and the men are yelling, and every plank thunders with trampling feet right over Jonah's head ; in all this raging tumult, Jonah sleeps his hideous sleep. He sees no black sky and raging sea, feels not the reeling timbers, and little hears he or heeds he the far rush of the mighty whale, which even now with open mouth is cleaving the seas after him. Ay, shipmates, Jonah was gone down into the sides of the ship a berth in the cabin as I have taken it and was fast asleep. But the frightened master comes to him, and shrieks hi his dead ear, " What meanest thou, sleeper ! arise ! " Startled from his lethargy by that direful cry, Jonah staggers to his feet, and stumbling to the deck, grasps a shroud, to look out upon the sea. But at that moment he is sprung upon by a panther billow leaping over the bulwarks. Wave after wave thus leaps into the ship, and finding no speedy vent runs roaring fore and aft, till the mariners come nigh to drowning while yet afloat. And ever, as the white moon shows her affrighted face from the steep gullies in the blackness overhead, aghast Jonah sees the rearing bowsprit pointing high upward, but soon beat downward again toward the tormented deep. ' Terrors upon terrors run shouting through his soul. In all his cringing attitudes, the God-fugitive is now too plainly known. The sailors mark him ; more and more certain grow their suspicions of him, and at last, fully to test the truth, by referring the whole matter to high Heaven, they fall to casting lots, to see for whose cause 56 MOBY-DICK this great tempest was upon them. The lot is Jonah's ; that discovered, then how furiously they mob him with their questions. " What is thine occupation ? Whence comest thou ? Thy country ? What people ? " But mark now, my shipmates, the behaviour of poor Jonah. The eager mariners but ask him who he is, and where from ; whereas, they not only receive an answer to those questions, but likewise another answer to a question not put by them, but the unsolicited answer is forced from Jonah by the hard hand of God that is upon him. ' " I am a Hebrew," he cries and then " I fear the Lord the God of Heaven who hath made the sea and the dry land ! " Fear him, O Jonah ? Ay, well mightest thou fear the Lord God then ! Straightway, he now goes on to make a full confession ; whereupon the mariners became more and more appalled, but still are pitiful. For when Jonah, not yet supplicating God for mercy, since he but too well knew the darkness of his deserts, when wretched Jonah cries out to them to take him and cast him forth into the sea, for he knew that for his sake this great tempest was upon them ; they mercifully turn from him, and seek by other means to save the ship. But all in vain ; the indignant gale howls louder ; then, with one hand raised invokingly to God, with the other they not unreluctantly lay hold of Jonah. ' And now behold Jonah taken up as an anchor and dropped into the sea ; when instantly an oily calmness floats out from the east, and the sea is still, as Jonah carries down the gale with him, leaving smooth water behind. He goes down in the whirling heart of such a masterless commotion that he scarce heeds the moment when he drops seething into the yawning jaws awaiting him ; and the whale shoots-to all his ivory teeth, like so many white bolts, upon his prison. Then Jonah prayed unto the Lord out of the fish's belly. But observe his THE SERMON 57 prayer, and learn a weighty lesson. For sinful as he is, Jonah does not weep and wail for direct deliverance. He feels that his dreadful punishment is just. He leaves all his deliverance to God, contenting himself with this, that spite of all his pains and pangs, he will still look toward His holy temple. And here, shipmates, is true and faithful repentance ; not clamorous for pardon, but grateful for punishment. And how pleasing to God was this conduct in Jonah, is shown in the eventual deliver- ance of him from the sea and the whale. Shipmates, I do not place Jonah before you to be copied for his sin, but I do place him before you as a model for repentance. Sin not ; but if you do, take heed to repent of it like Jonah. ' While he was speaking these words, the howling of the shrieking, slanting storm without seemed to add new power to the preacher, who, when describing Jonah's sea- storm, seemed tossed by a storm himself. His deep chest heaved as with a ground-swell ; his tossed arms seemed the warring elements at work ; and the thunders that rolled away from off his swarthy brow, and the light leaping from his eye, made all his simple hearers look on him with a quick fear that was strange to them. There now came a lull in his look, as he silently turned over the leaves of the Book once more ; and, at last, standing motionless, with closed eyes, for the moment, seemed communing with God and himself. But again he leaned over toward the people, and bowing his head lowly, with an aspect of the deepest yet manliest humility, he spake these words : c Shipmates, God has laid but one hand upon you ; both his hands press upon me. I have read ye by what murky light may be mine the lesson that Jonah teaches to all sinners ; and therefore to ye, and still more to me, for I am a greater sinner than ye. And now how gladly would I come down from this mast-head and sit on the 58 MOBY-DICK hatches there where you sit, and listen as you listen, while some one of you reads me that other and more awful lesson which Jonah teaches to me, as a pilot of the living God. How being an anointed pilot -prophet, or speaker of true things, and bidden by the Lord to sound those unwelcome truths in the ears of a wicked Nineveh, Jonah, appalled at the hostility he should raise, fled from his mission, and sought to escape his duty and his God by taking ship at Joppa. But God is everywhere ; Tarshish he never reached. As we have seen, God came upon him in the whale, and swallowed him down to living gulfs of doom, and with swift slantings tore him along " into the midst of the seas," where the eddying depths sucked him ten thousand fathoms down, and " the weeds were wrapped about his head," and all the watery world of woe bowled over him. Yet even then beyond the reach of any plummet " out of the belly of hell " when the whale grounded upon the ocean's utmost bones, even then, God heard the engulphed, repenting prophet when he cried. Then God spake unto the fish ; and from the shuddering cold and blackness of the sea, the whale came breaching up toward the warm and pleasant sun, and all the delights of air and earth ; and " vomited out Jonah upon the dry land " ; when the word of the Lord came a second time ; and Jonah, bruised and beaten his ears, like two sea- shells, still multitudinously murmuring of the ocean Jonah did the Almighty's bidding. And what was that, shipmates ? To preach the Truth to the face of False- hood ! That was it ! ' This, shipmates, this is that other lesson ; and we to that pilot of the living God who slights it. Woe to him whom this world charms from Gospel duty ! Woe to him who seeks to pour oil upon the waters when God has brewed them into a gale ! Woe to him who seeks to please rather than to appal ! Woe to him whose good THE SERMON 59 name is more to him than goodness ! Woe to him who, in this world, courts not dishonour ! Woe to him who would not be true, even though to be false were salva- tion ! Yea, woe to him who, as the great Pilot Paul has it, while preaching to others is himself a castaway ! ' He drooped and fell away from himself for a moment ; then lifting his face to them again, showed a deep joy in his eyes, as he cried out with a heavenly enthusiasm, ' But oh ! shipmates ! on the starboard hand of every woe, there is a sure delight ; and higher the top of that delight, than the bottom of the woe is deep. Is not the main-truck higher than the kelson is low ? Delight is to him a far, far upward, and inward delight who against the proud gods and commodores of this earth, ever stands forth his own inexorable self. Delight is to him whose strong arms yet support him, when the ship of this base treacherous world has gone down beneath him. Delight is to him, who gives no quarter in the truth, and kills, burns, and destroys all sin though he pluck it out from under the robes of Senators and Judges. Delight, top- gallant delight is to him, who acknowledges no law or lord, but the Lord his God, and is only a patriot to heaven. Delight is to him, whom all the waves of the billows of the seas of the boisterous mob can never shake from this sure Keel of the Ages. And eternal delight and delicious- ness will be his, who coming to lay him down, can say with his final breath Father ! chiefly known to me by Thy rod mortal or immortal, here I die. I have striven to be Thine, more than to be this world's, or mine own. Yet this is nothing ; I leave eternity to Thee ; for what is man that he should live out the lifetime of his God 1 ' He said no more, but slowly waving a benediction, covered his face with his hands, and so remained kneeling, till all the people had departed, and he was left alone in the place. CHAPTER X A BOSOM FRIEND RETURNING to the Spouter-Inn from the Chapel, I found Queequeg there quite alone ; he having left the Chapel before the benediction some time. He was sitting on a bench before the fire, with his feet on the stove hearth, and in one hand was holding close up to his face that little negro idol of his ; peering hard into its face, and with a jack-knife gently whittling away at its nose, meanwhile humming to himself in his heathenish way. But being now interrupted, he put up the image ; and pretty soon, going to the table, took up a large book there, and placing it on his lap began counting the pages with deliberate regularity ; at every fiftieth page as I fancied stopping a moment, looking vacantly around him, and giving utterance to a long-drawn gurgling whistle of astonishment. He would then begin again at the next fifty ; seeming to commence at number one each time, as though he could not count more than fifty, and it was only by such a large number of fifties being found together, that his astonishment at the multitude of pages was excited. With much interest I sat watching him. Savage though he was, and hideously marred about the face at least to my taste his countenance yet had a something in it which was by no means disagreeable. You cannot hide the soul. Through all his unearthly tattooings, I thought I saw the traces of a simple honest heart ; and in his large, deep eyes, fiery black and bold, there seemed 60 A BOSOM FRIEND 61 tokens of a spirit that would dare a thousand devils. And besides all this, there was a certain lofty bearing about the pagan, which even his uncouthness could not altogether maim. He looked like a man who had never cringed and never had had a creditor. Whether it was, too, that his head being shaved, his forehead was drawn out in freer and brighter relief, and looked more expansive than it otherwise would, this I will not venture to decide ; but certain it was his head was phrenologically an ex- cellent one. It may seem ridiculous, but it reminded me of General Washington's head, as seen in the popular busts of him. It had the same long regularly graded retreating slope from above the brows, which were like- wise very projecting, like two long promontories thickly wooded on top. Queequeg was George Washington cannibalistically developed. Whilst I was thus closely scanning him, half pretending meanwhile to be looking out at the storm from the case- ment, he never heeded my presence, never troubled him- self with so much as a single glance ; but appeared wholly occupied with counting the pages of the marvellous book. Considering how sociably we had been sleeping together the night previous, and especially considering the affection- ate arm I had found thrown over me upon waking in the morning, I thought this indifference of his very strange. But savages are strange beings ; at times you do not know exactly how to take them. At first they are over- awing ; their calm self-collectedness of simplicity seems a Socratic wisdom. I had noticed also that Queequeg never consorted at all, or but very little, with the other seamen in the inn. He made no advances whatever ; appeared to have no desire to enlarge the circle of his acquaintances. All this struck me as mighty singular ; yet, upon second thoughts, there was something almost sublime in it. Here was a man some twenty thousand I 62 MOBY-DICK miles from home, by the way of Cape Horn, that is which was the only way he could get there thrown among people as strange to him as though he were in the planet Jupiter ; and yet he seemed entirely at his ease ; preserving the utmost serenity ; content with his own companionship ; always equal to himself. Surely this was a touch of fine philosophy ; though no doubt he had never heard there was such a thing as that. But, per- haps, to be true philosophers, we mortals should not be conscious of so living or so striving. So soon as I hear that such or such a man gives himself out for a philosopher, I conclude that, like the dyspeptic old woman, he must have ' broken his digester.' As I sat there in that now lonely room ; the fire burn- ing low, in that mild stage when, after its first intensity has warmed the air, it then only glows to be looked at ; the evening shades and phantoms gathering round the casements, and peering in upon us silent, solitary twain ; the storm booming without in solemn swells ; I began to be sensible of strange feelings. I felt a melting in me. No more my splintered heart and maddened hand were turned against the wolfish world. This soothing savage had redeemed it. There he sat, his very indifference speaking a nature in which there lurked no civilised hypocrisies and bland deceits. Wild he was ; a very sight of sights to see ; yet I began to feel myself mysteri- ously drawn toward him. And those same things that would have repelled most others, they were the very magnets that thus drew me. 1 11 try a pagan friend, thought I, since Christian kindness has proved but hollow courtesy. I drew my bench near him, and made some friendly signs and hints, doing my best to talk with him meanwhile. At first he little noticed these advances ; but presently, upon my referring to his last night's hospitalities, he made out to ask me whether we were A BOSOM FRIEND 63 again to be bedfellows. I told him yes ; whereat I thought he looked pleased, perhaps a little complimented. We then turned over the book together, and I en- deavoured to explain to him the purpose of the printing, and the meaning of the few pictures that were in it. Thus I soon engaged his interest ; and from that we went to jabbering the best we could about the various outer sights to be seen in this famous town. Soon I proposed a social smoke ; and, producing his pouch and tomahawk, he quietly offered me a puff. And then we sat exchanging puffs from that wild pipe of his, and keeping it regularly passing between us. If there yet lurked any ice of indifference toward me in the pagan's breast, this pleasant, genial smoke we had soon thawed it out, and left us cronies. He seemed to take to me quite as naturally and unbiddenly as I to him ; and when our smoke was over, he pressed his forehead against mine, clasped me round the waist, and said that henceforth we were married ; meaning, in his country's phrase, that we were bosom friends ; he would gladly die for me, if need should be. In a countryman this sudden flame of friendship would have seemed far too premature, a thing to be much distrusted ; but in this simple savage those old rules would not apply. After supper, and another social chat and smoke, we went to our room together. He made me a present of his embalmed head ; took out his enormous tobacco wallet, and groping under the tobacco, drew out some thirty dollars in silver ; then spreading them on the table, and mechanically dividing them into two equal portions, pushed one of them toward me, and said it was mine. I was going to remonstrate ; but he silenced me by pouring them into my trowsers' pockets. I let them stay. He then went about his evening prayers, took out his idol, and removed the paper fire-board. By 64 MOBY-DICK certain signs and symptoms, I thought he seemed anxious for me to join him ; but well knowing what was to follow, I deliberated a moment whether, in case he invited me, I would comply or otherwise. I was a good Christian ; born and bred in the bosom of the infallible Presbyterian Church. How then could I unite with this wild idolater in worshipping his piece of wood ? But what is worship ? thought I. Do you suppose now, Ishmael, that the magnanimous God of heaven and earth pagans and all included can possibly be jealous of an insignificant bit of black wood ? Im- possible ! But what is worship ? to do the will of God ? that is worship. And what is the will of God ? to do to my fellow-man what I would have my fellow-man to do to me that is the will of God. Now, Queequeg is my fellow- man. And what do I wish that this Queequeg would do to me ? Why, unite with me in my particular Presbyterian form of worship. Consequently, I must then unite with him in his ; ergo, I must turn idolater. So I kindled the shavings ; helped prop up the innocent little idol ; offered him burnt biscuit with Queequeg ; salaamed before him twice or thrice ; kissed his nose ; and that done, we undressed and went to bed, at peace with our own consciences and all the world. But we did not go to sleep without some little chat. How it is I know not ; but there is no place like a bed for confidential disclosures between friends. Man and wife, they say, there open the very bottom of their souls to each other ; and some old couples often lie and chat over old times till nearly morning. Thus, then, in our hearts' honeymoon, lay I and Queequeg a cosy, loving pair. CHAPTER XI NIGHTGOWN WE had lain thus in bed, chatting and napping at short intervals, and Queequeg now and then affectionately throwing his brown tattooed legs over mine, and then drawing them back ; so entirely sociable and free and easy were we ; when, at last, by reason of our confabulations, what little nappishness remained in us altogether departed, and we felt like getting up again, though day-break was yet some way down the future. Yes, we became very wakeful ; so much so that our recumbent position began to grow wearisome, and by little and little we found ourselves sitting up ; the clothes well tucked around us, leaning against the head-board with our four knees drawn up close together, and our two noses bending over them, as if our knee-pans were warm- ing-pans. We felt very nice and snug, the more so since it was so chilly out of doors ; indeed out of bed-clothes too, seeing that there was no fire in the room. The more so, I say, because truly to enjoy bodily warmth, some small part of you must be cold, for there is no quality in this world that is not what it is merely by contrast. Nothing exists in itself. If you flatter yourself that you are all over comfortable, and have been so a long time, then you cannot be said to be comfortable any more. But if, like Queequeg and me in the bed, the tip of your nose or the crown of your head be slightly chilled, why then, indeed, in the general consciousness you feel most delightfully and unmistakably warm. For this reason VOL. i. E 66 MOBY-DICK a sleeping apartment should never be furnished with a fire, which is one of the luxurious discomforts of the rich. For the height of this sort of deliciousness is to have nothing but the blanket between you and your snugness and the cold of the outer air. Then there you lie like the one warm spark in the heart of an arctic crystal. We had been sitting in this crouching manner for some time, when all at once I thought I would open my eyes ; for when between sheets, whether by day or by night, and whether asleep or awake, I have a way of always keeping my eyes shut, in order the more to concentrate the snugness of being in bed. Because no man can ever feel his own identity aright except his eyes be closed ; as if darkness were indeed the proper element of our essences, though light be more congenial to our clayey part. Upon opening my eyes then, and coming out of my own pleasant and self-created darkness into the imposed and coarse outer gloom of the unilluminated twelve-o'clock-at-night, I experienced a disagreeable revulsion. Nor did I at all object to the hint from Queequeg that perhaps it were best to strike a light, seeing that we were so wide awake ; and besides he felt a strong desire to have a few quiet puffs from his tomahawk. Be it said, that though I had felt such a strong repugnance to his smoking in the bed the night before, yet see how elastic our stiff prejudices grow when love once comes to bend them. For now I liked nothing better than to have Queequeg smoking by me, even in bed, because he seemed to be full of such serene household joy then. I no more felt unduly concerned for the landlord's policy of insurance. I was only alive to the condensed confidential comfortableness of sharing a pipe and a blanket with a real friend. With our shaggy jackets drawn about our shoulders, we now passed the tomahawk from one to the other, till slowly there grew NIGHTGOWN 67 over us a blue hanging tester of smoke, illuminated by the flame of the new-lit lamp. Whether it was that this undulating tester rolled the savage away to far distant scenes, I know not, but he now spoke of his native island ; and, eager to hear his history, I begged him to go on and tell it. He gladly complied. Though at the time I but ill comprehended not a few of his words, yet subsequent disclosures, when I had become more familiar with his broken phraseology, now enable me to present the whole story such as it may prove in the mere skeleton I give. CHAPTER XII BIOGRAPHICAL QUEEQUEG was a native of Rokovoko, an island far away to the west and south. It is not down in any map ; true places never are. When a new-hatched savage running wild about his native woodlands in a grass clout, followed by the nib- bling goats, as if he were a green sapling ; even then, in Queequeg's ambitious soul, lurked a strong desire to see something more of Christendom than a specimen whaler or two. His father was a High Chief, a King ; his uncle a High Priest ; and on the maternal side he boasted aunts who were the wives of unconquerable warriors. There was excellent blood in his veins royal stuff ; though sadly vitiated, I fear, by the cannibal propensity he nourished in his untutored youth. A Sag Harbour ship visited his father's bay, and Quee- queg sought a passage to Christian lands. But the ship, having her full complement of seamen, spurned his suit ; and not all the King his father's influence could prevail. But Queequeg vowed a vow. Alone in his canoe, he paddled off to a distant strait, which he knew the ship must pass through when she quitted the island. On one side was a coral reef ; on the other a low tongue of land, covered with mangrove thickets that grew out into the water. Hiding his canoe, still afloat, among these thickets, with its prow seaward, he sat down in the stern, paddle low in hand ; and when the ship was gliding by, like a flash he darted out ; gained her side ; with one backward 68 BIOGRAPHICAL 69 dash of his foot capsized and sank his canoe ; climbed up the chains ; and throwing himself at full length upon the deck, grappled a ring-bolt there, and swore not to let it go, though hacked in pieces. In vain the captain threatened to throw him overboard ; suspended a cutlass over his naked wrists ; Queequeg was the son of a King, and Queequeg budged not. Struck by his desperate dauntlessness, and his wild desire to visit Christendom, the captain at last relented, and told him he might make himself at home. But this fine young savage this sea Prince of Wales never saw the captain's cabin. They put him down among the sailors, and made a whaleman of him. But like Czar Peter content to toil in the shipyards of foreign cities, Queequeg disdained no seeming ignominy, if thereby he might happily gain the power of enlightening his untutored countrymen. For at bottom so he told me he was actuated by a profound desire to learn among the Christians, the arts whereby to make his people still happier than they were ; and more than that, still better than they were. But, alas ! the \ practices of whalemen soon convinced him that even j Christians could be both miserable and wicked ; infinitely more so, than all his father's heathens. Arrived at last in old Sag Harbour ; and seeing what the sailors did there ; and then going on to Nantucket, and seeing how they spent their wages in that place also, poor Queequeg gave it up for lost. Thought he, it 5 s a wicked world in all meridians ; 1 11 die a pagan. And thus an old idolater at heart, he yet lived among these Christians, wore their clothes, and tried to talk their gibberish. Hence the queer ways about him, though now some time from home. By hints, I asked him whether he did not propose going back, and having a coronation ; since he might now consider his father dead and gone, he being very old and 70 MOBY-DICK feeble at the last accounts. He answered no, not yet ; and added that he was fearful Christianity, or rather Christians, had unfitted him for ascending the pure and undefiled throne of thirty pagan kings before him. But by and by, he said, he would return, as soon as he felt himself baptized again. For the nonce, however, he proposed to sail about, and sow his wild oats in all four oceans. They had made a harpooneer of him, and that barbed iron was in lieu of a sceptre now. I asked him what might be his immediate purpose, touching his future movements. He answered, to go to sea again, in his old vocation. Upon this, I told him that whaling was my own design, and informed him of my intention to sail out of Nantucket, as being the most promising port for an adventurous whaleman to embark from. He at once resolved to accompany me to that island, ship aboard the same vessel, get into the same watch, the same boat, the same mess with me, in short to share my every hap ; with both my hands in his, boldly dip into the Potluck of both worlds. To all this I joy- ously assented ; for besides the affection I now felt for Queequeg, he was an experienced harpooneer, and as such, could not fail to be of great usefulness to one who, like me, was wholly ignorant of the mysteries of whaling, though well acquainted with the sea as known to merchant seamen. His story being ended with his pipe's last dying puff, Queequeg embraced me, pressed his forehead against mine, and blowing out the light, we rolled over from each other, this way and that, and very soon were sleeping. CHAPTER XIII WHEELBARROW NEXT morning, Monday, after disposing of the embalmed head to a barber, for a block, I settled my own and com- rade's bill ; using, however, my comrade's money. The grinning landlord, as well as the boarders, seemed amaz- ingly tickled at the sudden friendship which had sprung up between me and Queequeg especially as Peter Coffin's cock-and-bull stories about him had previously so much alarmed me concerning the very person whom I now companied with. We borrowed a wheelbarrow, and embarking our things, including my own poor carpet-bag, and Quee- queg 's canvas sack and hammock, away we went down to the Moss, the little Nantucket packet schooner moored at the wharf. As we were going along the people stared ; not at Queequeg so much for they were used to seeing cannibals like him in their streets, but at seeing him and me upon such confidential terms. But we heeded them not, going along wheeling the barrow by turns, and Queequeg now and then stopping to adjust the sheath on his harpoon barbs. I asked him why he carried such a troublesome thing with him ashore, and whether all whaling-ships did not find their own harpoons. To this, in substance, he replied, that though what I hinted was true enough, yet he had a particular affection for his own harpoon, because it was of assured stuff, well tried in many a mortal combat, and deeply intimate with the hearts of whales. In short, like many inland reapers and 71 72 MOBY-DICK mowers, who go into the farmer's meadows armed with their own scythes though in no wise obliged to furnish them even so, Queequeg, for his own private reasons, preferred his own harpoon. Shifting the barrow from my hand to his, he told me a funny story about the first wheelbarrow he had ever seen. It was in Sag Harbour. The owners of his ship, it seems, had lent him one, in which to carry his heavy chest to his boarding-house. Not to seem ignorant about the thing though in truth he was entirely so, concerning the precise way in which to manage the barrow Quee- queg puts his chest upon it ; lashes it fast ; and then shoulders the barrow and marches up the wharf. ' Why/ said I, ' Queequeg, you might have known better than that, one would think. Didn't the people laugh ? ' Upon this, he told me another story. The people of his island of Rokovoko, it seems, at their wedding feasts express the fragrant water of young cocoa-nuts into a large stained calabash like a punch -bowl ; and this punch -bowl always forms the great central ornament on the braided mat where the feast is held. Now a certain grand merchant ship once touched at Rokovoko, and its commander from all accounts a very stately punctilious gentleman, at least for a sea-captain this commander was invited to the wedding feast of Queequeg 's sister, a pretty young princess just turned of ten. Well ; when all the wedding guests were assembled at the bride's bamboo cottage, this captain marches in, and being assigned the post of honour, placed himself over against the punch- bowl, and between the High Priest and his majesty the King, Queequeg 's father. Grace being said, for those people have their grace as well as we though Queequeg told me that unlike us, who at such times look downward to our platters, they, on the contrary, copying the ducks, glance upward to the great Giver of all feasts Grace, WHEELBARROW 73 I say, being said, the High Priest opens the banquet by the immemorial ceremony of the island ; that is, dipping his consecrated and consecrating fingers into the bowl before the blessed - beverage circulates. Seeing himself placed next the Priest, and noting the ceremony, and thinking himself being captain of a ship as having plain precedence over a mere island King, especially in the King's own house the captain coolly proceeds to wash his hands in the punch-bowl ; taking it, I suppose, for a huge finger-glass. ' Now/ said Queequeg, ' what you tink now ? Didn't our people laugh ? ' At last, passage paid, and luggage safe, we stood on board the schooner. Hoisting sail, it glided down the Acushnet river. On one side, New Bedford rose in terraces of streets, their ice -covered trees all glittering in the clear, cold air. Huge hills and mountains of casks on casks were piled upon her wharves, and side by side the world-wandering whale-ships lay silent and safely moored at last ; while from others came a sound of carpenters and coopers, with blended noises of fires and forges to melt the pitch, all betokening that new cruises were on the start ; that one most perilous and long voyage ended, only begins a second ; and a second ended, only begins a third, and so on, forever and for aye. Such is the endlessness, yea, the intolerableness of all earthly effort. Gaining the more open water, the bracing breeze waxed fresh ; the little Moss tossed the quick foam from her bows, as a young colt his snortings. How I snuffed that Tartar air ! how I spurned that turnpike earth ! that common highway all over dented with the marks of slavish heels and hoofs ; and turned me to admire the magnanimity of the sea which will permit no records. At the same foam-fountain, Queequeg seemed to drink and reel with me. His dusky nostrils swelled apart ; he 74 MOBY-DICK showed his filed and pointed teeth. On, on we flew ; and our offing gained, the Moss did homage to the blast ; ducked and dived her brows as a slave before the Sultan. Sideways leaning, we sideways darted ; every rope-yarn tingling like a wire ; the two tall masts buckling like Indian canes in land tornadoes. So full of this reeling scene were we, as we stood by the plunging bowsprit, that for some time we did not notice the jeering glances of the passengers, a lubber-like assembly, who marvelled that two fellow-beings should be so companionable ; as though a white man were anything more dignified than a whitewashed negro. But there were some boobies and bumpkins there, who, by their intense greenness, must have come from the heart and centre of all verdure. Queequeg caught one of these young saplings mimicking him behind his back. I thought the bumpkin's hour of doom was come. Dropping his harpoon, the brawny savage caught him in his arms, and by an almost miracu- lous dexterity and strength, sent him high up bodily into the air ; then slightly tapping his stern in mid-somerset, the fellow landed with bursting lungs upon his feet, while Queequeg, turning his back upon him, lighted his toma- hawk-pipe and passed it to me for a puff. ' Capting ! capting ! ' yelled the bumpkin, running toward that officer ; ' Capting, capting, here 's the devil.' ' Halloa, you sir/ cried the captain, a gaunt rib of the sea, stalking up to Queequeg, ' what in thunder do you mean by that ? Don't you know you might have killed that chap ? ' ' What him say ? ' said Queequeg, as he mildly turned to me. ' He say,' said I, ' that you came near kill-e that man there,' pointing to the still shivering greenhorn. ' Kill-e/ cried Queequeg, twisting his tattooed face WHEELBARROW 75 into an unearthly expression of disdain, ' ah ! him bevy small-e fish-e ; Queequeg no-kill-e so small-e fish-e ; Queequeg Idll-e big whale ! ' ' Look you/ roared the captain, ' I '11 kill-e you, you cannibal, if you try any more of your tricks aboard here ; so mind your eye.' But it so happened just then, that it was high time for the captain to mind his own eye. The prodigious strain upon the mainsail had parted the weather-sheet, and the tremendous boom was now flying from side to side, com- pletely sweeping the entire after part of the deck. The poor fellow whom Queequeg had handled so roughly, was swept overboard ; all hands were in a panic ; and to attempt snatching at the boom to stay it, seemed madness. It flew from right to left, and back again, almost in one ticking of a watch, and every instant seemed on the point of snapping into splinters. Nothing was done, and noth- ing seemed capable of being done ; those on deck rushed toward the bows, and stood eyeing the boom as if it were the lower jaw of an exasperated whale. In the midst of this consternation, Queequeg dropped deftly to his knees, and crawling under the path of the boom, whipped hold of a rope, secured one end to the bulwarks, and then flinging the other like a lasso, caught it round the boom as it swept over his head, and at the next jerk, the spar was that way trapped, and all was safe. The schooner was run into the wind, and while the hands were clearing away the stern boat, Queequeg, stripped to the waist, darted from the side with a long living arc of a leap. For three minutes or more he was seen swimming like a dog, throwing his long arms straight out before him, and by turns revealing his brawny shoulders through the freezing foam. I looked at the grand and glorious fellow, but saw no one to be saved. The greenhorn had gone down. Shooting himself perpendicularly from the water, Quee- 76 MOBY-DICK queg now took an instant's glance around him, and seem- ing to see just how matters were, dived down and dis- appeared. A few minutes more, and he rose again, one arm still striking out, and with the other dragging a life- less form. The boat soon picked them up. The poor bumpkin was restored. All hands voted Queequeg a noble trump ; the captain begged his pardon. From that hour I clove to Queequeg like a barnacle ; yea, till poor Queequeg took his last long dive. Was there ever such unconsciousness ? He did not seem to think that he at all deserved a medal from the Humane and Magnanimous Societies. He only asked for water fresh water something to wipe the brine off ; that done, he put on dry clothes, lighted his pipe, and leaning against the bulwarks, and mildly eyeing those around him, seemed to be saying to himself ' It 's a mutual, joint-stock world, in all meridians. We canni- bals must help these Christians. 5 CHAPTER XIV NANTUCKET NOTHING more happened on the passage worthy the mentioning ; so, after a fine run, we safely arrived in Nantucket. Nantucket ! Take out your map and look at it. See what a real corner of the world it occupies ; how it stands there, away off shore, more lonely than the Eddy- stone lighthouse. Look at it a mere hillock, and elbow of sand ; all beach, without a background. There is more sand there than you would use in twenty years as a substitute for blotting-paper. Some gamesome wights will tell you that they have to plant weeds there, they don't grow naturally ; that they import Canada thistles ; that they have to send beyond seas for a spile to stop a leak in an oil-cask ; that pieces of wood in Nantucket are carried about like bits of the true cross in Rome ; that people there plant toadstools before their houses, to get under the shade in summer time ; that one blade of grass makes an oasis, three blades in a day's walk a prairie ; that they wear quicksand shoes, something like Laplander snow-shoes ; that they are so shut up, belted about, every way enclosed, surrounded, and made an utter island of by the ocean, that to their very chairs and tables small clams will sometimes be found adhering, as to the backs of sea-turtles. But these extravaganzas only show that Nantucket is no Illinois. Look now at the wondrous traditional story of how this island was settled by the red men. Thus goes the legend. 77 78 MOBY-DICK In olden times an eagle swooped down upon the New England coast, and carried off an infant Indian in his talons. With loud lament the parents saw their child borne out of sight over the wide waters. They resolved to follow in the same direction. Setting out in their canoes, after a perilous passage they discovered the island, and there they found an empty ivory casket, the poor little Indian's skeleton. What wonder, then, that these Nantucketers, born on a beach, should take to the sea for a livelihood ! They first caught crabs and quohogs in the sand ; grown bolder, they waded out with nets for mackerel ; more experienced, they pushed off in boats and captured cod ; and at last, launching a navy of great ships on the sea, explored this watery world ; put an incessant belt of cir- cumnavigations round it ; peeped in at Behring Straits ; and in all seasons and all oceans declared everlasting war with the mightiest animated mass that has survived the Flood ; most monstrous and most mountainous ! That Himalayan, salt-sea mastodon, clothed with such por- tentousness of unconscious power, that his very panics are more to be dreaded than his most fearless and malicious assaults ! And thus have these naked Nantucketers, these sea- hermits, issuing from their ant-hill in the sea, overrun and conquered the watery world like so many Alexanders ; parcelling out among them the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian oceans, as the three pirate powers did Poland. Let America add Mexico to Texas, and pile Cuba upon Canada ; let the English over swarm all India, and hang out their blazing banner from the sun; two-thirds of this terr- aqueous globe are the Nantucketer's. For the sea is his ; he owns it, as Emperors own empires ; other seamen having but a right of way through it. Merchant ships are but extension bridges ; armed ones but floating forts ; NANTUCKET 79 even pirates and privateers, though following the sea as highwaymen the road, they but plunder other ships, other fragments of the land like themselves, without seeking to draw their living from the bottomless deep itself. The Nantucketer, he alone resides and riots on the sea ; he alone, in Bible language, goes down to it in ships ; to and fro ploughing it as his own special plantation. There is his home ; there lies his business, which a Noah's flood would not interrupt, though it overwhelmed all the millions in China. He lives on the sea, as prairie cocks in the prairie ; he hides among the waves, he climbs them as chamois hunters climb the Alps. For years he knows not the land ; so that when he comes to it at last, it smells like another world, more strangely than the moon would to an Earthsman. With the landless gull, that at sunset folds her wings and is rocked to sleep between billows ; so, at nightfall, the Nantucketer, out of sight of land, furls his sails, and lays him to his rest, while under his very pillow rush herds of walruses and whales. CHAPTER XV CHOWDER IT was quite late in the evening when the little Moss came snugly to anchor, and Queequeg and I went ashore ; so we could attend to no business that day, at least none but a supper and a bed. The landlord of the Spouter- Inn had recommended us to his cousin Hosea Hussey of the Try Pots, whom he asserted to be the proprietor of one of the best kept hotels in all Nantucket, and more- over he had assured us that Cousin Hosea, as he called him, was famous for his chowders. In short, he plainly hinted that we could not possibly do better than try pot- luck at the Try Pots. But the directions he had given us about keeping a yellow warehouse on our starboard hand till we opened a white church to the larboard, and then keeping that on the larboard hand till we made a corner three points to the starboard, and that done, then ask the first man we met where the place was : these crooked directions of his very much puzzled us at first, especially as, at the outset, Queequeg insisted that the yellow warehouse our first point of departure must be left on the larboard hand, whereas I had understood Peter Coffin to say it was on the starboard. However, by dint of beating about a little in the dark, and now and then knocking up a peaceable inhabitant to inquire the way, we at last came to something which there was no mistaking. Two enormous wooden pots painted black, and sus- pended by asses' ears, swung from the cross-trees of an 80 CHOWDER 81 old topmast, planted in front of an old doorway. The horns of the cross-trees were sawed off on the other side, so that this old topmast looked not a little like a gallows. Perhaps I was over-sensitive to such impressions at the time, but I could not help staring at this gallows with a vague misgiving. A sort of crick was in my neck as I gazed up to the two remaining horns ; yes, two of them, one for Queequeg, and one for me. It 's ominous, thinks I. A Coffin my Innkeeper upon landing in my first whaling port ; tombstones staring at me in the whale- man's chapel ; and here a gallows ! and a pair of pro- digious black pots too ! Are these last throwing out oblique hints touching Tophet ? I was called from these reflections by the sight of a freckled woman with yellow hair and a yellow gown, standing in the porch of the inn, under a dull red lamp swinging there, that looked much like an injured eye, and carrying on a brisk scolding with a man in a purple woollen shirt. 1 Get along with ye, 5 said she to the man, ' or I '11 be combing ye ! ' 4 Come on, Queequeg,' said I, 'all right. There's Mrs. Hussey.' And so it turned out ; Mr. Hosea Hussey being from home, but leaving Mrs. Hussey entirely competent to attend to all his affairs. Upon making known our de- sires for a supper and a bed, Mrs. Hussey, postponing further scolding for the present, ushered us into a little room, and seating us at a table spread with the relics of a recently concluded repast, turned round to us and said, ' Clam or cod ? ' ' What 's that about cods, ma'am ? ' said I, with much politeness. 4 Clam or cod ? ' she repeated. ' A clam for supper ? a cold clam ; is that what you VOL. I. F 82 MOBY-DICK mean, Mrs. Hussey ? ' says I ; ' but that 's a rather cold and clammy reception in the winter time, ain't it, Mrs. Hussey ? ' But being in a great hurry to resume scolding the man in the purple shirt, who was waiting for it in the entry, and seeming to hear nothing but the word ' clam, 5 Mrs. Hussey hurried toward an open door leading to the kitchen, and bawling out ' clam for two, ' disappeared. ' Queequeg,' said I, ' do you think that we can make out a supper for us both on one clam ? ' However, a warm savoury steam from the kitchen served to belie the apparently cheerless prospect before us. But when that smoking chowder came in, the mystery was delightfully explained. Oh, sweet friends ! hearken to me. It was made of small juicy clams, scarcely bigger than hazel nuts, mixed with pounded ship- biscuit, and salted pork cut up into little flakes ; the whole enriched with butter, and plentifully seasoned with pepper and salt. Our appetites being sharpened by the frosty voyage, and in particular, Queequeg seeing his favourite fishing food before him, and the chowder being surpassingly excellent, we dispatched it with great expedition : when leaning back a moment and bethink- ing me of Mrs. Hussey's clam and cod announcement, I thought I would try a little experiment. Stepping to the kitchen door, I uttered the word ' cod ' with great emphasis, and resumed my seat. In a few moments the savoury steam came forth again, but with a different flavour, and in good time a fine cod-chowder was placed before us. We resumed business ; and while plying our spoons in the bowl, thinks I to myself, I wonder now if this here has any effect on the head ? What 's that stultifying saying about chowder-headed people ? ' But look, CHOWDER 83 Queequeg, ain't that a live eel in your bowl ? Where 's your harpoon ? ' Fishiest of all fishy places was the Try Pots; which well deserved its name ; for the pots there were always boiling chowders. Chowder for breakfast, and chowder for dinner, and chowder for supper, till you began to look for fish-bones coming through your clothes. The area before the house was paved with clam-shells. Mrs. Hussey wore a polished necklace of codfish vertebra ; and Hosea Hussey had his account-books bound in superior old shark-skin. There was a fishy flavour to the milk, too, which I could not at all account for, till one morning happening to take a stroll along the beach among some fishermen's boats, I saw Hosea 's brindled cow feeding on fish remnants, and marching along the sand with each foot in a cod's decapitated head, looking very slipshod, I assure ye. Supper concluded, we received a lamp, and directions from Mrs. Hussey concerning the nearest way to bed ; but, as Queequeg was about to precede me up the stairs, the lady reached forth her arm, and demanded his har- poon ; she allowed no harpoon in her chambers. ' Why not ? J said I ; ' every true whaleman sleeps with his harpoon but why not ? ' ' Because it 's dangerous, 5 says she. ' Ever since young Stiggs coming from that unfort'nt v'y'ge of his, when he was gone four years and a half, with only three barrels of ile, was found dead in my first floor back, with his harpoon in his side ; ever since then I allow no boarders to take sich dangerous weepons in their rooms at night. So, Mr. Queequeg ' (for she had learned his name), ' I will just take this here iron, and keep it for you till morning. But the chowder ; clam or cod to-morrow for breakfast, men ? ' ' Both,' says I ; ' and let 's have a couple of smoked herring by way of variety.' CHAPTER XVI THE SHIP IN bed we concocted our plans for the morrow. But to my surprise and no small concern, Queequeg now gave me to understand, that he had been diligently consulting Yojo the name of his black little god and Yojo had told him two or three times over, and strongly insisted upon it everyway, that instead of our going together among the whaling-fleet in harbour, and in concert selecting our craft ; instead of this, I say, Yojo earnestly enjoined that the selection of the ship should rest wholly with me, inasmuch as Yojo purposed befriending us ; and, in order to do so, had already pitched upon a vessel, which, if left to myself, I, Ishmael, should infallibly light upon, for all the world as though it had turned out by chance ; and in that vessel I must immediately ship myself, for the present irrespective of Queequeg. I have forgotten to mention that, in many things, Queequeg placed great confidence in the excellence of Yojo's judgment and surprising forecast of things ; and cherished Yojo with considerable esteem, as a rather good sort of god, who perhaps meant well enough upon the whole, but in all cases did not succeed in his benevolent designs. Now, this plan of Queequeg's, or rather Yojo's, touch- ing the selection of our craft ; I did not like that plan at all. I had not a little relied upon Queequeg's sagacity to point out the whaler best fitted to carry us and our fortunes securely. But as all my remonstrances pro- 84 THE SHIP 85 duced no effect upon Queequeg, I was obliged to acquiesce; and accordingly prepared to set about this business with a determined rushing sort of energy and vigour, that should quickly settle that trifling little affair. Next morning early, leaving Queequeg shut up with Yojo in our little bedroom for it seemed that it was some sort of Lent or Ramadan, or day of fasting, humiliation, and prayer with Queequeg and Yojo that day ; how it was I never could find out, for, though I applied myself to it several times, I never could master his liturgies and XXXIX Articles leaving Queequeg, then, fasting on his tomahawk-pipe, and Yojo warming himself at his sacrificial fire of shavings, I sallied out among the shipping. After much prolonged sauntering and many random inquiries, I learnt that there were three ships up for three-years' voyages the Devil-Dam, the Tit-bit, and the Pequod. Devil-Dam, I do not know the origin of ; Tit-bit is obvious ; Pequod, you will no doubt remember, was the name of a celebrated tribe of Massachusetts Indians, now extinct as the ancient Medes. I peered and pryed about the Devil-Dam ; from her, hopped over to the Tit-bit ; and, finally, going on board the Pequod, looked around her for a moment, and then decided that this was the very ship for us. You may have seen many a quaint craft in your day, for aught I know ; square-toed luggers ; mountainous Japanese junks ; butter-box galliots, and what not ; but take my word for it, you never saw such a rare old craft as this same rare old Pequod. She was a ship of the old school, rather small if anything ; with an old-fashioned claw-footed look about her. Long seasoned and weather- stained in the typhoons and calms of all four oceans, her old hull's complexion was darkened like a French grena- dier's, who has alike fought in Egypt and Siberia. Her venerable bows looked bearded. Her masts cut some- 86 MOBY-DICK where on the coast of Japan, where her original ones were lost overboard in a gale her masts stood stiffly up like the spines of the three old kings of Cologne. Her ancient decks were worn and wrinkled, like the pilgrim-worshipped flag-stone in Canterbury Cathedral where Becket bled. But to all these her old antiquities were added new and marvellous features, pertaining to the wild business that for more than half a century she had followed. Old Captain Peleg, many years her chief mate, before he com- manded another vessel of his own, and now a retired seaman, and one of the principal owners of the Pequod, this old Peleg, during the term of his chief mateship, had built upon her original grotesqueness, and inlaid it, all over, with a quaintness both of material and device, un- matched by anything except it be Thorkill-Hake's carved buckler or bedstead. She was apparelled like any bar- baric Ethiopian emperor, his neck heavy with pendants of polished ivory. She was a thing of trophies. A canni- bal of a craft, tricking herself forth in the chased bones of her enemies. All round, her unpanelled, open bul- warks were garnished like one continuous jaw, with the long sharp teeth of the sperm whale, inserted there for pins, to fasten her old hempen thews and tendons to. Those thews ran not through base blocks of land-wood, but deftly travelled over sheaves of sea -ivory. Scorning a turnstile wheel at her reverend helm, she sported there a tiller ; and that tiller was in one mass, curiously carved from the long narrow lower jaw of her hereditary foe. The helmsman who steered by that tiller in a tempest, felt like the Tartar, when he holds back his fiery steed by clutching its jaw. A noble craft, but somehow a most melancholy ! All noble things are touched with that. Now when I looked about the quarter-deck, for some one having authority, in order to propose myself as a candidate for the voyage, at first I saw nobody ; but I THE SHIP 87 could not well overlook a strange sort of tent, or rather wigwam, pitched a little behind the mainmast. It seemed only a temporary erection used in port. It was of a conical shape, some ten feet high ; consisting of the long, huge slabs of limber black bone taken from the middle and highest part of the jaws of the right whale. Planted with their broad ends on the deck, a circle of these slabs laced together, mutually sloped toward each other, and at the apex united in a tufted point, where the loose hairy fibres waved to and fro like the top-knot on some old Pottowottamie sachem's head. A triangular opening faced toward the bows of the ship, so that the insider commanded a complete view forward. And half concealed in this queer tenement, I at length found one who by his aspect seemed to have authority ; and who, it being noon, and the ship's work suspended, was now enjoying respite from the burden of command. He was seated on an old-fashioned oaken chair, wriggling all over with curious carving ; and the bottom of which was formed of a stout interlacing of the same elastic stuff of which the wigwam was constructed. There was nothing so very particular, perhaps, about the appearance of the elderly man I saw ; he was brown and brawny, like most old seamen, and heavily rolled up in blue pilot-cloth, cut in the Quaker style ; only there was a fine and almost microscopic network of the minutest wrinkles interlacing round his eyes, which must have arisen from his continual sailings in many hard gales, and always looking to windward ; for this causes the muscles about the eyes to become pursed together. Such eye- wrinkles are very effectual in a scowl. ' Is this the captain of the Pequod ? ' said I, advancing to the door of the tent. ' Supposing it be the captain of the Pequod, what dost thou want of him ? ' he demanded. 88 MOBY-DICK ' I was thinking of shipping.' ' Thou wast, wast thou ? I see thou art no Nan- tucketer ever been in a stove boat ? ' ' No, sir, I never have.' ' Dost know nothing at all about whaling, I dare say eh? ' ' Nothing, sir ; but I have no doubt I shall soon learn. I 've been several voyages in the merchant service, and I think that ' Marchant service be damned. Talk not that lingo to me. Dost see that leg ? I '11 take that leg away from thy stern, if ever thou talkest of the marchant service to me again. Marchant service indeed ! I suppose now ye feel considerable proud of having served in those marchant ships. But flukes ! man, what makes thee want to go a-whaling, eh ? it looks a little suspicious, don't it, eh ? Hast not been a pirate, hast thou ? Didst not rob thy last captain, didst thou ? Dost not think of murdering the officers when thou gettest to sea ? ' I protested my innocence of these things. I saw that under the mask of these half-humorous innuendoes, this old seaman, as an insulated Quakerish Nantucketer, was full of his insular prejudices, and rather distrustful of all aliens, unless they hailed from Cape Cod or the Vineyard. ' But what takes thee a-whaling ? I want to know that before I think of shipping ye.' 4 Well, sir, I want to see what whaling is. I want to see the world/ ' Want to see what whaling is, eh ? Have ye clapped eye on Captain Ahab ? ' ' Who is Captain Ahab, sir ? ' 4 Ay, ay, I thought so. Captain Ahab is the captain of this ship.' ' I am mistaken then. I thought I was speaking to the captain himself.' THE SHIP 89 ' Thou art speaking to Captain Peleg that 's who ye are speaking to, young man. It belongs to me and Captain Bildad to see the Pequod fitted out for the voyage, and supplied with all her needs, including crew. We are part owners and agents. But as I was going to say, if thou wantest to know what whaling is, as thou tellest ye do, I can put ye in a way of finding it out before ye bind yourself to it, past backing out. Clap eye on Captain Ahab, young man, and thou wilt finxl that he has only one leg.' ' What do you mean, sir ? Was the other one lost by a whale ? ' ' Lost by a whale ! Young man, come nearer to me : it was devoured, chewed up, crunched by the mon- strousest parmacetty that ever chipped a boat ! ah, ah ! ' I was a little alarmed by his energy, perhaps also a little touched at the hearty grief in his concluding exclamation, but said as calmly as I could, ' What you say is no doubt true enough, sir ; but how could I know there was any peculiar ferocity in that particular whale, though indeed I might have inferred as much from the simple fact of the accident.' ' Look ye now, young man, thy lungs are a sort of soft, d' ye see ; thou dost not talk shark a bit. Sure, ye 've been to sea before now ; sure of that ? ' ' Sir,' said I, ' I thought I told you that I had been four voyages in the merchant ' ' Hard down out of that ! Mind what I said about the marchant service don't aggravate me I won't have it. But let us understand each other. I have given thee a hint about what whaling is ; do ye yet feel inclined for it ? ' 4 1 do, sir.' ' Very good. Now, art thou the man to pitch a harpoon down a live whale's throat, and then jump after it ? Answer, quick ! ' 90 MOBY-DICK ' I am, sir, if it should be positively indispensable to do so ; not to be got rid of, that is ; which I don't take to be the fact.' 6 Good again. Now then, thou not only wantest to go a -whaling, to find out by experience what whaling is, but ye also want to go in order to see the world ? Was not that what ye said ? I thought so. Well then, just step forward there, and take a peep over the weather-bow, and then back to me and tell me what ye see there.' For a moment I stood a little puzzled by this curious request, not knowing exactly how to take it, whether humorously or in earnest. But concentrating all his crow's feet into one scowl, Captain Peleg started me on the errand. Going forward and glancing over the weather -bow, I perceived that the ship, swinging to her anchor with the flood-tide, was now obliquely pointing toward the open ocean. The prospect was unlimited, but exceedingly monotonous and forbidding ; not the slightest variety that I could see. ' Well, what 's the report ? ' said Peleg when I came back ; ' what did ye see ? ' 1 Not much,' I replied 'nothing but water ; considerable horizon though, and there 's a squall coming up, I think.' ' Well, what dost thou think then of seeing the world ? Do ye wish to go round Cape Horn to see any more of it, I eh ? Can't ye see the world where you stand ? ' I was a little staggered, but go a-whaling I must, and I would ; and the Pequod was as good a ship as any I (thought the best and all this I now repeated to Peleg. Seeing me so determined, he expressed his willingness to ship me. ' And thou mayest as well sign the papers right off, ' he added ' come along with ye.' And so saying, he led the way below deck into the cabin. THE SHIP 91 Seated on the transom was what seemed to me a most uncommon and surprising figure. It turned out to be Captain Bildad, who along with Captain Peleg was one of the largest owners of the vessel ; the other shares, as is sometimes the case in these ports, being held by a crowd of old annuitants ; widows, fatherless children, and chancery wards ; each owning about the value of a timber head, or a foot of plank, or a nail or two in the ship. People in Nantucket invest their money in whaling- vessels, the same way that you do yours in approved state stocks bringing in good interest. Now Bildad, like Peleg, and indeed many other Nan- tucketers, was a Quaker, the island having been originally settled by that sect ; and to this day its inhabitants in general retain in an uncommon measure the peculiarities of the Quaker, only variously and anomalously modified by things altogether alien and heterogeneous. For some of these same Quakers are the most sanguinary of all sailors and whale -hunters. They are fighting Quakers ; they are Quakers with a vengeance. So that there are instances among them of men, who, named with Scripture names a singularly common fashion on the island and in childhood naturally imbib- ing the stately dramatic thee and thou of the Quaker idiom ; still, from the audacious, daring, and boundless adventure of their subsequent lives, strangely blend with these unoutgrown peculiarities a thousand bold dashes of character, not unworthy a Scandinavian sea-king, or a poetical pagan Roman. And when these things unite in a man of greatly superior natural force, with a globular brain and a ponderous heart ; who has also by the still- ness and seclusion of many long night-watches in the remotest waters, and beneath constellations never seen here at the north, been led to think untraditionally and independently ; receiving all nature's sweet or savage 92 MOBY-DICK impressions fresh from her own virgin voluntary and confiding breast, and thereby chiefly, but with some help from accidental advantages, to learn a bold and nervous lofty language that man makes one in a whole nation's census a mighty pageant creature, formed for noble tragedies. Nor will it at all detract from him, dramatic- ally regarded, if either by birth or other circumstances, he have what seems a half- wilful over-ruling morbidness at the bottom of his nature. For all men tragically great are made so through a certain morbidness. Be sure of this, young ambition, all mortal greatness is but disease. But, as yet we have not to do with such an one, but with quite another ; and still a man, who, if indeed peculiar, it only results again from another phase of the Quaker, modified by individual circumstances. Like Captain Peleg, Captain Bildad was a well-to-do, retired whaleman. But unlike Captain Peleg who cared not a rush for what are called serious things, and indeed deemed those self-same serious things the veriest of all trifles Captain Bildad had not only been originally educated according to the strictest sect of Nantucket Quakerism, but all his subsequent ocean life ; and the sight of many unclad, lovely island creatures, round the Horn all that had not moved this native-born Quaker one single jot, had not so much as altered one angle of his vest. Still, for all this immutableness, was there some lack of common consistency about worthy Captain Bildad. Though refusing, from conscientious scruples, to bear arms against land invaders, yet himself had illimitably invaded the Atlantic and Pacific ; and though a sworn foe to human bloodshed, yet had he in his straight -bodied coat, spilled tuns upon tuns of leviathan gore. How now in the contemplative evening of his days, the pious Bildad reconciled these things in the reminiscence, I do not know ; but it did not seem to concern him much, THE SHIP 93 and very probably he had long since come to the sage and sensible conclusion that a Oman's religion is one thing, and this practical world quite another. This world pays dividends. Rising from a little cabin-boy in short clothes of the drabbest drab, to a harpooneer in a broad shad- bellied waistcoat ; from that becoming boat-header, chief mate, and captain, and finally a shipowner ; Bildad, as I hinted before, had concluded his adventurous career by wholly retiring from active life at the goodly age of sixty, and dedicating his remaining days to the quiet receiving of his well-earned income. Now Bildad, I am sorry to say, had the reputation of being an incorrigible old hunks, and in his sea -going days, a bitter, hard taskmaster. They told me in Nantucket, though it certainly seems a curious story, that when he sailed the old Categut whaleman, his crew, upon arriving home, were mostly all carried ashore to the hospital, sore exhausted and worn out. For a pious man, especi- v ally for a Quaker, he was certainly rather hard-hearted, to \ say the least. He never used to swear, though, at his men, they said ; but somehow he got an inordinate quantity of cruel, unmitigated hard work out of them. When Bildad was a chief mate, to have his drab-coloured eye intently looking at you, made you feel completely nervous, till you could clutch something a hammer or a marling-spike and go to work like mad, at something or other, never mind what. Indolence and idleness perished from before him. His own person was the exact embodi- ment of his utilitarian character. On his long, gaunt body he carried no spare flesh, no superfluous beard, his chin having a soft, economical nap to it, like the worn nap of his broad-brimmed hat. Such, then, was the person that I saw seated on the transom when I followed Captain Peleg down into the cabin. The space between the decks was small ; and 94 MOBY-DICK there, bolt-upright, sat old Bildad, who always sat so, and never leaned, and this to save his coat-tails. His broad-brim was placed beside him ; his legs were stiffly crossed ; his drab vesture was buttoned up to his chin ; and spectacles on nose, he seemed absorbed in reading from a ponderous volume. ' Bildad,' cried Captain Peleg, ' at it again, Bildad, eh ? Ye have been studying those Scriptures, now, for the last thirty years, to my certain knowledge. How far ye got, Bildad ? ' As if long habituated to such profane talk from his old shipmate, Bildad, without noticing his present irreverence, quietly looked up, and seeing me, glanced again inquiringly toward Peleg. 4 He says he 's our man, Bildad/ said Peleg, ' he wants to ship. 5 ' Dost thee ? ' said Bildad, in a hollow tone, and turning round to me. ' I dost/ said I unconsciously, he was so intense a Quaker. ' What do ye think of him, Bildad ? ' said Peleg. ' He '11 do,' said Bildad, eyeing me, and then went on spelling away at his book in a mumbling tone quite audible. I thought him the queerest old Quaker I ever saw, especially as Peleg, his friend and old shipmate, seemed such a blusterer. But I said nothing, only looking round me sharply. Peleg now threw open a chest, and drawing forth the ship's articles, placed pen and ink before him, and seated himself at a little table. I began to think it was high time to settle with myself at what terms I would be willing to engage for the voyage. I was already aware that in the whaling business they paid no wages ; but all hands, including the captain, received certain shares of the profits called lays, and that these lays were THE SHIP 95 proportioned to the degree of importance pertaining to the respective duties of the ship's company. I was also aware that being a green-hand at whaling, my own lay would not be very large ; but considering that I was used to the sea, could steer a ship, splice a rope, and all that, I made no doubt that from all I had heard I should be offered at least the 275th lay that is, the 275th part of the clear nett proceeds of the voyage, whatever that might eventually amount to. And though the 275th lay was what they call a rather long lay, yet it was better than nothing ; and if we had a lucky voyage, might pretty nearly pay for the clothing I would wear out on it, not to speak of my three years' beef and board, for which I would not have to pay one stiver. It might be thought that this was a poor way to accumulate a princely fortune and so it was, a very poor way indeed. But I am one of those that never take on about princely fortunes, and am quite content if the world is ready to board and lodge me, while I am putting up at this grim sign of the Thunder Cloud. Upon the whole, I thought that the 275th lay would be about the fair thing, but would not have been surprised had I been offered the 200th, considering I was of a broad-shouldered make. But one thing, nevertheless, that made me a little distrustful about receiving a generous share of the profits was this : Ashore, I had heard something of both Captain Peleg and his unaccountable old crony Bildad ; how that they being the principal proprietors of the Pequod, there- fore the other and more inconsiderable and scattered owners, left nearly the whole management of the ship's affairs to these two. And I did not know but what the stingy old Bildad might have a mighty deal to say about shipping hands, especially as I now found him on board the Pequod, quite at home there in the cabin, and reading his Bible as if at his own fireside. Now while Peleg was 96 MOBY-DICK vainly trying to mend a pen with his jack-knife, old Bildad, to my no small surprise, considering that he was such an interested party in these proceedings ; Bildad never heeded us, but went on mumbling to himself out of his book, ' Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth ' ' Well, Captain Bildad,' interrupted Peleg, ' what d' ye say, what lay shall we give this young man ? ' ' Thou knowest best,' was the sepulchral reply, ' the seven hundred and seventy-seventh wouldn't be too much, would it ? " where moth and rust do corrupt, but lay " ' Lay, indeed, thought I, and such a lay ! the seven hundred and seventy-seventh ! Well, old Bildad, you are determined that I, for one, shall not lay up many lays here below, where moth and rust do corrupt. It was an exceedingly long lay that, indeed ; and though from the magnitude of the figure it might at first deceive a lands- man, yet the slightest consideration will show that though seven hundred and seventy -seven is a pretty large num- ber, yet, when you come to make a teenth of it, you will then see, I say, that the seven hundred and seventy- seventh part of a farthing is a good deal less than seven hundred and seventy -seven gold doubloons ; and so I thought at the time. 4 Why, blast your eyes, Bildad,' cried Peleg, ' thou dost not want to swindle this young man ! he must have more than that.' ' Seven hundred and seventy -seventh,' again said Bildad, without lifting his eyes ; and then went on mumbling ' for where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.' ' I am going to put him down for the three hundredth,' said Peleg, ' do ye hear that, Bildad ? The three hundredth lay, I say.' THE SHIP 97 Bildad laid down his book, and turning solemnly to- ward him said, ' Captain Peleg, thou hast a generous heart ; but thou must consider the duty thou owest to the other owners of this ship widows and orphans; many of them and that if we too abundantly reward the labours of this young man, we may be taking the bread from those widows and those orphans. The seven hundred and seventy -seventh lay, Captain Peleg.' ' Thou Bildad ! ' roared Peleg, starting up and clattering about the cabin. ' Blast ye, Captain Bildad, if I had followed thy advice in these matters, I would afore now had a conscience to lug about that would be heavy enough to founder the largest ship that ever sailed round Cape Horn.' 4 Captain Peleg,' said Bildad steadily, ' thy conscience may be drawing ten inches of water, or ten fathoms, I can't tell ; but as thou art still an impenitent man, Captain Peleg, I greatly fear lest thy conscience be but a leaky one ; and will in the end sink thee foundering down to the fiery pit, Captain Peleg.' ' Fiery pit ! fiery pit ! ye insult me, man ; past all natural bearing, ye insult me. It 's an all-fired outrage to tell any human creature that he 's bound to hell. Flukes and flames ! Bildad, say that again to me, and start my soul-bolts, but I '11 I '11 yes, I '11 swallow a live goat with all his hair and horns on. Out of the cabin, ye canting, drab-coloured son of a wooden gun & straight wake with ye ! ' As he thundered out this he made a rush at Bildad, but with a marvellous oblique, sliding celerity, Bildad for that time eluded him. Alarmed at this terrible outburst between the two principal and responsible owners of the ship, and feeling half a mind to give up all idea of sailing in a vessel so questionably owned and temporarily commanded, I VOL. i. G 98 MOBY-DICK stepped aside from the door to give egress to Bildad, who, I made no doubt, was all eagerness to vanish from before the awakened wrath of Peleg. But to my astonishment, he sat down again on the transom very quietly, and seemed to have not the slightest intention of withdrawing. He seemed quite used to impenitent Peleg and his ways. As for Peleg, after letting off his rage as he had, there seemed no more left in him, and he, too, sat down like a lamb, though he twitched a little as if still nervously agitated. ' Whew ! ' he whistled at last ' the squall 's gone off to leeward, I think. Bildad, thou used to be good at sharpening a lance, mend that pen, will ye. My jack- knife here needs the grindstone. That 's he ; thank ye, Bildad. Now then, my young man, Ishmael 's thy name, didn't ye say ? Well then, down ye go here, Ishmael, for the three hundredth lay.' ' Captain Peleg,' said I, ' I have a friend with me who wants to ship too shall I bring him down to-morrow ? ' ' To be sure,' said Peleg. ' Fetch him along, and we '11 look at him.' ' What lay does he want ? ' groaned Bildad, glancing up from the book in which he had again been burying himself. * Oh ! never thee mind about that, Bildad,' said Peleg. ' Has he ever whaled it any ? ' turning to me. ' Killed more whales than I can count, Captain Peleg.' ' Well, bring him along then.' And, after signing the papers, off I went ; nothing doubting but that I had done a good morning's work, and that the Pequod was the identical ship that Yojo had provided to carry Queequeg and me round the Cape. But I had not proceeded far, when I began to bethink me that the captain with whom I was to sail yet remained unseen by me ; though, indeed, in many cases, a whale- ship will be completely fitted out, and receive all her crew THE SHIP 99 on board, ere the captain makes himself visible by arriv- ing to take command ; for sometimes these voyages are so prolonged, and the shore intervals at home so exceed- ingly brief, that if the captain have a family, or any absorbing concernment of that sort, he does not trouble himself much about his ship in port, but leaves her to the owners till all is ready for sea. However, it is always as well to have a look at him before irrevocably commit- ting yourself into his hands. Turning back I accosted Captain Peleg, inquiring where Captain Ahab was to be found. * And what dost thou want of Captain Ahab ? It 's all right enough ; thou art shipped.' ' Yes, but I should like to see him. 3 ' But I don't think thou wilt be able to at present. I don't know exactly what 's the matter with him ; but he keeps close inside the house ; a sort of sick, and yet he don't look so. In fact, he ain't sick ; but no, he isn't well either. Anyhow, young man, he won't always see me, so I don't suppose he will thee. He 's a queer man, Captain Ahab so some think but a good one. Oh, thou 'It like him well enough ; no fear, no fear. He 's a grand, ungodly, god-like man, Captain Ahab ; doesn't speak much ; but, when he does speak, then you may well listen. Mark ye, be forewarned ; Ahab 's above the common ; Ahab 's been in colleges, as well as 'mong the cannibals ; been used to deeper wonders than the waves ; fixed his fiery lance hi mightier, stranger foes than whales. His lance ! ay, the keenest and the surest that out of all our isle ! Oh ! he ain't Captain Bildad ; no, and he ain't Captain Peleg ; he 's Ahab, boy ; and Ahab of old, thou knowest, was a crowned king ! ' ' And a very vile one. When that wicked king was slain, the dogs, did they not lick his blood ? ' 1 Come hither to me hither, hither,' said Peleg, with 100 MOBY-DICK a significance in his eye that almost startled me. ' Look ye, lad ; never say that on board the Pequod. Never say it anywhere. Captain Ahab did not name himself. 'Twas a foolish, ignorant whim of his crazy, widowed mother, who died when he was only a twelvemonth old. And yet the old squaw Tistig, at Gay Head, said that the name would somehow prove prophetic. And, perhaps, other fools like her may tell thee the same. I wish to warn thee. It 's a lie. I know Captain Ahab well ; I 've sailed with him as mate years ago ; I know what he is a good man not a pious, good man, like Bildad, but a swearing good man something like me only there 's a good deal more of him. Ay, ay, I know that he was never very jolly ; and I know that on the passage home, he was a little out of his mind for a spell ; but it was the sharp shooting pains in his bleeding stump that brought that about, as anyone might see. I know, too, that ever since he lost his leg last voyage by that accursed whale, he ? s been a kind of moody desperate moody, and savage sometimes ; but that will all pass off. And once for all, let me tell thee and assure thee, young man, it 's better to sail with a moody good captain than a laughing bad one. So good-bye to thee and wrong not Captain Ahab, because he happens to have a wicked name. Be- sides, my boy, he has a wife not three voyages wedded a_ sweet, resigned girl. Think of that ; by that sweet girl that old man has a child : hold ye then there can be any utter, hopeless harm in Ahab ? No, no, my lad ; stricken, blasted, if he be, Ahab has his humanities ! ' As I walked away, I was full of thoughtfuhiess ; what had been incidentally revealed to me of Captain Ahab, filled me with a certain wild vagueness of painfulness concerning him. And somehow, at the time, I felt a sympathy and a sorrow for him, but for I don't know what, ^unless it was the cruel loss of his leg. And yet I THE SHIP 101 also felt a strange awe of him ; but that sort of awe, which I cannot at all describe, was not exactly awe ; I do not know what it was. But I felt it ; and it did not disincline me toward him ; though I felt impatience at what seemed like mystery in him, so imperfectly as he was known to me then. However, my thoughts were at length carried in other directions, so that for the present dark Ahab slipped my mind. CHAPTER XVII THE RAMADAN As Queequeg 's Ramadan, or Fasting and Humiliation, was to continue all day, I did not choose to disturb him till toward night -fall ; for I cherish the greatest respect toward everybody's religious obligations, never mind how comical, and could not find it in my heart to under- value even a congregation of ants worshipping a toad- stool ; or those other creatures in certain parts of our earth, who with a degree of footmanism quite unpre- cedented in other planets, bow down before the torso of a deceased landed proprietor merely on account of the inordinate possessions yet owned and rented in his name. I say, we good Presbyterian Christians should be charitable in these things, and not fancy ourselves so vastly superior to other mortals, pagans and what not, because of their half -crazy conceits on these subjects. There was Queequeg, now, certainly entertaining the most absurd notions about Yojo and his Ramadan ; but what of that ? Queequeg thought he knew what he was about, I suppose ; he seemed to be content ; and there let him rest. All our arguing with him would not avail ; let him be, I say : and Heaven have mercy on us all Presby- terians and pagans alike for we are all somehow dread- fully cracked about the head, and sadly need mending. Toward evening, when I felt assured that all his performances and rituals must be over, I went up to his room and knocked at the door ; but no answer. I tried 102 i THE RAMADAN 103 to open it, but it was fastened inside. ' Queequeg,' said I softly through the keyhole : all silent. ' I say, Quee- queg ! why don't you speak ? It 's I Ishmael.' But all remained still as before. I began to grow alarmed. I had allowed him such abundant time ; I thought he might have had an apoplectic fit. I looked through the key- hole ; but the door opening into an odd corner of the room, the keyhole prospect was but a crooked and sinister one. I could only see part of the foot-board of the bed and a line of the wall, but nothing more. I was surprised to behold resting against the wall the wooden shaft of Quee- queg 's harpoon, which the landlady the evening previous had taken from him, before our mounting to the chamber. That 's strange, thought I ; but at any rate, since the harpoon stands yonder, and he seldom or never goes abroad without it, therefore he must be inside here, and no possible mistake. ' Queequeg ! Queequeg ! ' all still. Something must have happened. Apoplexy ! I tried to burst open the door ; but it stubbornly resisted. Running downstairs, I quickly stated my suspicions to the first person I met the chambermaid. ' La ! la ! ' she cried, ' I thought something must be the matter. I went to make the bed after breakfast, and the door was locked ; and not a mouse to be heard ; and it 's been just so silent ever since. But I thought, maybe, you had both gone off and locked your baggage in for safe keeping. La ! la, ma'am ! Mistress ! murder ! Mrs. Hussey ! apoplexy ! ' and with these cries, she ran toward the kitchen, I following. Mrs. Hussey soon appeared, with a mustard-pot in one hand and a vinegar-cruet in the other, having just broken away from the occupation of attending to the castors, and scolding her little black boy meantime. ' Wood-house ! ' cried I, ' which way to it ? Run, for God's sake, and fetch something to pry open the door 104 MOBY-DICK the axe ! the axe ! he 's had a stroke ; depend upon it ! ' and so saying I was unmethodically rushing up- stairs again empty-handed, when Mrs. Hussey interposed the mustard-pot and vinegar-cruet, and the entire castor of her countenance. ' What J s the matter with you, young man ? ' ' Get the axe ! For God's sake, run for the doctor, someone, while I pry it open ! ' ' Look here/ said the landlady, quickly putting down the vinegar-cruet, so as to have one hand free ; ' look here ; are you talking about prying open any of my doors ? ' and with that she seized my arm. ' What 's the matter with you ? What 's the matter with you, shipmate ? ' In as calm, but rapid a manner as possible, I gave her to understand the whole case. Unconsciously clapping the vinegar-cruet to one side of her nose, she ruminated for an instant ; then exclaimed 4 No ! I haven't seen it since I put it there.' Running to a little closet under the landing of the stairs, she glanced in, and returning, told me that Queequeg's harpoon was missing. ' He 's killed himself,' she cried. ' It 's unfort'nate Stiggs done over again there goes another counterpane God pity his poor mother ! it will be the ruin of my house. Has the poor lad a sister ? Where 's that girl ? there, Betty, go to Snarles the Painter, and tell him to paint me a sign, with " no suicides permitted here, and no smoking in the parlour " ; might as well kill both birds at once. Kill ? The Lord be merciful to his ghost ! What 's that noise there ? You, young man, avast there ! ' And running after me, she caught me as I was again trying to force open the door. ' I won't allow it ; I won't have my premises spoiled. Go for the locksmith, there 's one about a mile from here. But avast ! ' putting her hand in her side-pocket, ' here 's THE RAMADAN 105 a key that '11 fit, I guess ; let 's see.' And with that, she turned it in the lock ; but, alas ! Queequeg 's supple- mental bolt remained unwithdrawn within. 6 Have to burst it open,' said I, and was running down the entry a little, for a good start, when the landlady caught at me, again vowing I should not break down her premises ; but I tore from her, and with a sudden bodily rush dashed myself full against the mark. With a prodigious noise the door flew open, and the knob slamming against the wall, sent the plaster to the ceiling ; and there, good heavens ! there sat Queequeg, altogether cool and self-collected ; right in the middle of the room ; squatting on his hams, and holding Yojo on top of his head. He looked neither one way nor the other way, but sat like a carved image with scarce a sign of active life. ' Queequeg/ said I, going up to him, ' Queequeg, what 's the matter with you ? ' ' He hain't been a-sittin* so all day, has he ? ' said the landlady. But all we said, not a word could we drag out of him ; I almost felt like pushing him over, so as to change his position, for it was almost intolerable, it seemed so pain- fully and unnaturally constrained ; especially, as in all probability he had been sitting so for upward of eight or ten hours, going too without his regular meals. 'Mrs. Hussey,' said I, 'he's alive, at all events; so leave us, if you please, and I will see to this strange affair myself.' Closing the door upon the landlady, I endeavoured to >revail upon Queequeg to take a chair ; but in vain. There he sat ; and all he could do for all my polite arts and blandishments he would not move a peg, nor say a single word, nor even look at me, nor notice my presence in any the slightest way. 106 MOBY-DICK I wonder, thought I, if this can possibly be a part of his Ramadan ; do they fast on their hams that way in his native island ? It must be so ; yes, it 's part of his creed, I suppose ; well, then, let him rest ; he '11 get up sooner or later, no doubt. It can't last for ever, thank God, and his Ramadan only comes once a year ; and I don't believe it 's very punctual then. I went down to supper. After sitting a long time listening to the long stories of some sailors who had just come from a plum-pudding voyage, as they called it (that is, a short whaling voyage in a schooner or brig, confined to the north of the Line, in the Atlantic Ocean only) ; after listening to these plum-puddingers till nearly eleven o'clock, I went upstairs to go to bed, feeling quite sure by this time Queequeg must certainly have brought his Ramadan to a termination. But no ; there he was just where I had left him ; he had not stirred an inch. I began to grow vexed with him ; it seemed so downright sense- less and insane to be sitting there all day and half the night on his hams in a cold room, holding a piece of wood on his head. ' For heaven's sake, Queequeg, get up and shake your- self ; get up and have some supper. You 11 starve ; you '11 kill yourself, Queequeg.' But not a word did he reply. Despairing of him, therefore, I deter mined to go to bed and to sleep ; and no doubt, before a great while, he would follow me. But previous to turning in, I took my heavy bearskin jacket, and threw it over him, as it promised to be a very cold night ; and he had nothing but his ordinary round jacket on. For some time, do all I would, I could not get into the faintest doze. I had blown out the candle ; and the mere thought of Queequeg not four feet off sitting there in that uneasy position, stark alone in the cold and dark ; this made me really THE RAMADAN 107 wretched. Think of it ; sleeping all night in the same room with a wide-awake pagan on his hams in this dreary, unaccountable Ramadan ! But somehow I dropped off at last, and knew nothing more till break of day ; when, looking over the bedside, there squatted Queequeg, as if he had been screwed down to the floor. But as soon as the first glimpse of sun entered the window, up he got, with stiff and grating joints, but with a cheerful look ; limped toward me where I lay ; pressed his forehead again against mine ; and said his Ramadan was over. Now, as I before hinted, I have no objection to any person's religion, be it what it may, so long as that person does not kill or insult any other person, because that other person don't believe it also. But when a man's religion becomes really frantic ; when it is a positive torment to him ; and, in fine, makes this earth of ours an uncom- fortable inn to lodge in ; then I think it high time to take that individual aside and argue the point with him. And just so I now did with Queequeg. ' Queequeg,' said I, ' get into bed now, and lie and listen to me.' I then went on, beginning with the rise and progress of the primitive religions, and coming down to the various religions of the present time, during which time I laboured to show Queequeg that all these Lents, Ramadans, and prolonged ham-squattings in cold, cheerless rooms were stark nonsense ; bad for the health ; useless for the soul ; opposed, in short, to the obvious laws of hygiene and common-sense. I told him, too, that he being in other things such an extremely sensible and sagacious savage, it pained me, very badly pained me, to see him now so deplorably foolish about this ridiculous Ramadan of his. Besides, argued I, fasting makes the body cave in ; hence the spirit caves in ; and all thoughts born of a fast must necessarily be half -starved. This is the reason why most 108 MOBY-DICK dyspeptic religionists cherish such melancholy notions about their hereafters. In one word, Queequeg, said I, rather digressively ; hell is an idea first born on an un- digested apple-dumpling ; and since then perpetuated through the hereditary dyspepsias nurtured by Bamadans. I then asked Queequeg whether he himself was ever troubled with dyspepsia ; expressing the idea very plainly, so that he could take it in. He said no ; only upon one memorable occasion. It was after a great feast given by his father the King, on the gaming of a great battle wherein fifty of the enemy had been killed by about two o'clock in the afternoon, and all cooked and eaten that very evening. 4 No more, Queequeg,' said I, shuddering ; 'that will do ' ; for I knew the inferences without his further hint- ing them. I had seen a sailor who had visited that very island, and he told me that it was the custom, when a great battle had been gained there, to barbecue all the slain in the yard or garden of the victor ; and then, one by one, they were placed in great wooden trenchers, and garnished round like a pilau, with breadfruit and cocoa- nuts ; and with some parsley in their mouths, were sent round with the victor's compliments to all his friends, just as though these presents were so many Christmas turkeys. After all, I do not think that my remarks about religion made much impression upon Queequeg. Because, in the first place, he somehow seemed dull of hearing on that important subject, unless considered from his own point of view ; and, in the second place, he did not more than one-third understand me, couch my ideas simply as I would ; and, finally, he no doubt thought he knew a good deal more about the true religion than I did. He looked at me with a sort of condescending concern and compassion, as though he thought it a great pity that such THE RAMADAN 109 a sensible young man should be so hopelessly lost to evangelical pagan piety. At last we rose and dressed ; and Queequeg, taking a prodigiously hearty breakfast of chowders of all sorts, so that the landlady should not make much profit by reason of his Ramadan, we sallied out to board the Pequod, sauntering along, and picking our teeth with halibut bones. CHAPTER XVIII HIS MARK As we were walking down the end of the wharf toward the ship, Queequeg carrying his harpoon, Captain Peleg in his gruff voice loudly hailed us from his wigwam, saying he had not suspected my friend was a cannibal, and furthermore announcing that he let no cannibals on board that craft, unless they previously produced their papers. ' What do you mean by that, Captain Peleg ? ' said I, now jumping on the bulwarks, and leaving my comrade standing on the wharf. ' I mean,' he replied, ' he must show his papers.' ' Yea,' said Captain Bildad in his hollow voice, sticking his head from behind Peleg 's, out of the wigwam. ' He must show that he 's converted. Son of darkness/ he added, turning to Queequeg, c art thou at present in communion with any Christian church ? ' ' Why/ said I, ' he 's a member of the First Congrega- tional Church/ Here be it said, that many tattooed savages sailing in Nantucket ships at last come to be converted into the churches. ' First Congregational Church/ cried Bildad, ' what ! that worships in Deacon Deuteronomy Cole man's meeting- house ? ' and so saying, taking out his spectacles, he rubbed them with his great yellow bandana handkerchief, and putting them on very carefully, came out of the wigwam, and leaning stiffly over the bulwarks, took a good long look at Queequeg. IIP HIS MARK 111 * How long hath he been a member ? ' he then said, turning to me ; ' not very long, I rather guess, young man.' 4 No/ said Peleg, ' and he hasn't been baptized right either, or it would have washed some of that devil's blue off his face.' ' Do tell, now/ cried Bildad, ' is this Philistine a regular member of Deacon Deuteronomy's meeting ? I never saw him going there, and I pass it every Lord's day.' ' I don't know anything about Deacon Deuteronomy or his meeting/ said I, ' all I know is, that Queequeg here is a born member of the First Congregational Church. He is a deacon himself, Queequeg is.' ' Young man/ said Bildad sternly, ' thou art skylarking with me explain thyself, thou young Hittite. What church dost thee mean ? answer me.' Finding myself thus hard pushed, I replied, ' I mean, sir, the same ancient Catholic Church to which you and I, and Captain Peleg there, and Queequeg here, and all of us, and every mother's son and soul of us belong ; the great and everlasting First Congregation of this whole worshipping world ; we all belong to that ; only some of us cherish some queer crotchets no ways touching the grand belief ; in that we all join hands/ ' Splice, thou mean'st splice hands/ cried Peleg, draw- ing nearer. ' Young man, you 'd better ship for a mis- sionary, instead of a foremast hand ; I never heard a better sermon. Deacon Deuteronomy why Father Mapple himself couldn't beat it, and he 's reckoned some- thing. Come aboard, come aboard ; never mind about the papers. I say, tell Quohog there what 's that you call him ? tell Quohog to step along. By the great anchor, what a harpoon he 's got there ! looks like good stuff that ; and he handles it about right. I say, Quohog, 112 MOBY-DICK or whatever your name is, did you ever stand in the head of a whale-boat ? did you ever strike a fish ? ' Without saying a word, Queequeg, in his wild sort of way, jumped upon the bulwarks, from thence into the bows of one of the whale-boats hanging to the side ; and then bracing his left knee, and poising his harpoon, cried out in some such way as this : ' Cap'ain, you see him small drop tar on water dere ? You see him ? well, spose him one whale eye, well, den ! ' and taking sharp aim at it, he darted the iron right over old Bildad's broad brim, clean across the ship's decks, and struck the glistening tar spot out of sight/ ' Now, 5 said Queequeg, quietly hauling in the line, * spos-ee him whale-e eye ; why, dad whale dead.' ' Quick, Bildad,' said Peleg to his partner, who, aghast at the close vicinity of the flying harpoon, had retreated toward the cabin gangway. ' Quick, I say, you, Bildad, and get the ship's papers. We must have Hedgehog there, I mean Quohog, in one of our boats. Look ye, Quohog, we '11 give ye the ninetieth lay, and that 's more than ever was given a harpooneer yet out of Nantucket.' So down we went into the cabin, and to my great joy Queequeg was soon enrolled among the same ship's company to which I myself belonged. When all preliminaries were over and Peleg had got everything ready for signing, he turned to me and said, ' I guess, Quohog there don't know how to write, does he ? I say, Quohog, blast ye ! dost thou sign thy name or make thy mark ? ' But at this question, Queequeg, who had twice or thrice before taken part in similar ceremonies, looked no ways abashed ; but taking the offered pen, copied upon the paper, in the proper place, an exact counterpart of a queer round figure which was tattooed upon his arm ; HIS MARK 113 so that through Captain Peleg's obstinate mistake touch- ing his appellative, it stood something like this : Quohog. his >J< mark. Meanwhile Captain Bildad sat earnestly and stead- fastly eyeing Queequeg, and at last rising solemnly and fumbling in the huge pockets of his broad-skirted drab coat, took out a bundle of tracts, and selecting one entitled ' The Latter Day Coming ; or No Time to Lose,' placed it in Queequeg 's hands, and then grasping them and the book with both his, looked earnestly into his eyes, and said, ' Son of darkness, I must do my duty by thee ; I am part owner of this ship, and feel concerned for the souls of all its crew ; if thou still clingest to thy pagan ways, which I sadly fear, I beseech thee, remain not for aye a Belial bondsman. Spurn the idol Bell, and the hideous dragon ; turn from the wrath to come ; mind thine eye, I say ; oh ! goodness gracious ! steer clear of the fiery pit ! ' Something of the salt sea yet lingered in old Bildad's language, heterogeneously mixed with Scriptural and domestic phrases. ' Avast there, avast there, Bildad, avast now spoiling our harpooneer,' cried Peleg. ' Pious harpooneers never make good voyagers it takes the shark out of 'em ; no harpooneer is worth a straw who ain't pretty sharkish. There was young Nat Swaine, once the bravest boat- header out of all Nantucket and the Vineyard ; he joined the meeting, and never came to good. He got so frightened about his plaguy soul, that he shrinked and sheered away from whales, for fear of after-claps, in case he got stove and went to Davy Jones.' c Peleg ! Peleg ! ' said Bildad, lifting his eyes and hands, 'thou thyself, as I myself, hast seen many a perilous time ; thou knowest, Peleg, what it is to have the fear of VOL. I. H 114 MOBY-DICK death ; how, then, can'st thou prate in this ungodly guise. Thou beliest thine own heart, Peleg. Tell me, when this same Pequod here had her three masts overboard in that typhoon on Japan, that same voyage when thou went mate with Captain Ahab, didst thou not think of Death and the Judgment then ? ' ' Hear him, hear him now, ' cried Peleg, marching across the cabin, and thrusting his hands far down into his pockets, ' hear him, all of ye. Think of that ! When every moment we thought the ship would sink ! Death and the Judgment then ? What ? With all three masts making such an everlasting thundering against the side ; and every sea breaking over us, fore and aft. Think of Death and the Judgment then ? No ! no time to think about Death then. Life was what Captain Ahab and I was thinking of ; and how to save all hands how to rig jury-masts how to get into the nearest port ; that was what I was thinking of. } Bildad said no more, but buttoning up his coat, stalked on deck, where we followed him. There he stood, very quietly overlooking some sail-makers who were mending a topsail in the waist. Now and then he stooped to pick up a patch, or save an end of the tarred twine, which otherwise might have been wasted. CHAPTER XIX THE PEOPHET ' SHIPMATES, have ye shipped in that ship ? ' Queequeg and I had just left the Pequod, and were sauntering away from the water, for the moment each occupied with his own thoughts, when the above words were put to us by a stranger, who, pausing before us, levelled his massive forefinger at the vessel in question. He was but shabbily apparelled in faded jacket and patched trowsers ; a rag of a black handkerchief investing his neck. A confluent small-pox had in all directions flowed over his face, and left it like the complicated ribbed bed of a torrent, when the rushing waters have been dried up. 4 Have ye shipped in her ? ' he repeated. 4 You mean the ship Pequod, I suppose,' said I, trying to gain a little more time for an uninterrupted look at him. ' Ay, the Pequod that ship there/ he said, drawing back his whole arm, and then rapidly shoving it straight out from him, with the fixed bayonet of his pointed finger darted full at the object. ' Yes,' said I, ' we have just signed the articles.' ' Anything down there about your souls ? ' ' About what ? ' ' Oh, perhaps you hav'n't got any,' he said quickly. No matter though, I know many chaps that hav'n't got ly, good luck to 'em ; and they are all the better off for it. A soul 's a sort of a fifth wheel to a wagon.' ' What are you jabbering about, shipmate ? ' said I. 115 ! 116 MOBY-DICK ' He 's got enough, though, to make up for all de- ficiencies of that sort in other chaps,' abruptly said the stranger, placing a nervous emphasis upon the word he. ' Queequeg,' said I, ' let 's go ; this fellow has broken loose from somewhere ; he 's talking about something and somebody we don't know.' ' Stop ! ' cried the stranger. ' Ye said true ye hav'n't seen Old Thunder yet, have ye ? ' ' Who 's Old Thunder ? ' said I, again riveted with the insane earnestness of his manner. ' Captain Ahab.' ' What ! the captain of our ship, the Pequod ? ' ' Ay, among some of us old sailor chaps, he goes by that name. Ye hav'n't seen him yet, have ye ? ' ' No, we hav'n't. He 's sick, they say, but is getting better, and will be all right again before long.' 4 All right again before long ! ' laughed the stranger, with a solemnly derisive sort of laugh. ' Look ye ; when Captain Ahab is all right, then this left arm of mine will be all right ; not before.' i What do you know about him ? ' ' What did they tell you about him ? Say that ! ' ' They didn't tell much of anything about him ; only I 've heard that he 's a good whale -hunter, and a good captain to his crew.' ' That 's true, that 's true yes, both true enough. But you must jump when he gives an order. Step and growl ; growl and go that 's the word with Captain Ahab. But nothing about that thing that happened to him off Cape Horn, long ago, when he lay like dead for three days and nights ; nothing about that deadly scrim- mage with the Spaniard afore the altar in Santa ? heard nothing about that, eh ? Nothing about the silver cala- bash he spat into ? And nothing about his losing his leg last voyage, according to the prophecy. Didn't ye THE PROPHET 117 hear a word about them matters and something more, eh ? No, I don't think ye did ; how could ye ? Who knows it ? Not all Nantucket, I guess. But hows'ever, may- hap, ye Ve heard tell about the leg, and how he lost it ; ay> ye have heard of that, I dare say. Oh yes, that every one knows a 'most I mean they know he 's only one leg ; and that a parmacetti took the other off.' 4 My friend/ said I, ' what all this gibberish of yours is about, I don't know, and I don't much care ; for it seems to me that you must be a little damaged in the head. But if you are speaking of Captain Ahab of that ship there, the Pequod, then let me tell you, that I know all about the loss of his leg.' ' All about it, eh sure you do ? all ? ' * Pretty sure.' With finger pointed and eye levelled at the Pequod, the beggar-like stranger stood a moment, as if in a troubled re very ; then starting a little, turned and said, ' Ye Ve shipped, have ye ? Names down on the papers ? Well, well, what 's signed, is signed ; and what 's to be, will be ; and then again, perhaps it won't be, after all. Anyhow, it's all fixed and arranged a 'ready ; and some sailors or other must go with him, I suppose ; as well these as any other men, God pity 'em ! Morning to ye, shipmates, morning ; the ineffable heavens bless ye ; I 'm sorry I stopped ye.' ' Look here, friend,' said I, 'if you have anything im- portant to tell us, out with it ; but if you are only trying to bamboozle us, you are mistaken in your game ; that 's all I have to say.' ' And it 's said very well, and I like to hear a chap talk up that way ; you are just the man for him the likes of ye. Morning to ye, shipmates, morning ! Oh ! when ye get there, tell 'em I Ve concluded not to make one of 'em.' ' Ah, my dear fellow, you can't fool us that way you 118 MOBY-DICK can't fool us. It is the easiest thing in the world for a man to look as if he had a great secret in him.' ' Morning to ye, shipmates, morning.' ' Morning it is,' said I. ' Come along, Queequeg, let 's leave this crazy man. But stop, tell me your name, will you?' ^Elijah/ Elijah ! thought I, and we walked away, both comment- ing, after each other's fashion, upon this ragged old sailor ; and agreed that he was nothing but a humbug, trying to be a bugbear. But we had not gone perhaps above a hundred yards, when chancing to turn a corner, and look- ing back as I did so, who should be seen but Elijah follow- ing us, though at a distance. Somehow, the sight of him struck me so, that I said nothing to Queequeg of his being behind, but passed on with my comrade, anxious to see whether the stranger would turn the same corner that we did. He did ; and then it seemed to me that he was dogging us, but with what intent I could not for the life of me imagine. This circumstance, coupled with his ambiguous, half-hinting, half-revealing, shrouded sort of talk, now begat in me all kinds of vague wonderments and half -apprehensions, and all connected with the Pequod ; and Captain Ahab ; and the leg he had lost ; and the Cape Horn fit ; and the silver calabash ; and what Captain Peleg had said of him, when I left the ship the day previous ; and the prediction of the squaw Tistig ; and the voyage we had bound ourselves to sail ; and a hundred other shadowy things. I was resolved to satisfy myself whether this ragged Elijah was really dogging us or not, and with that intent crossed the way with Queequeg, and on that side of it retraced our steps. But Elijah passed on, without seeming to notice us. This relieved me ; and once more, and finally as it seemed to me, I pronounced him in my heart, a humbug. CHAPTER XX ALL ASTIR A DAY or two passed, and there was great activity aboard the Pequod. Not only were the old sails being mended, but new sails were coming on board, and bolts of canvas, and coils of rigging ; in short, everything betokened that the ship's preparations were hurrying to a close. Captain Peleg seldom or never went ashore, but sat in his wigwam keeping a sharp look-out upon the hands : Bildad did all the purchasing and providing at the stores ; and the men employed in the hold and on the rigging were working till long after night-fall. On the day following Queequeg's signing the articles, word was given at all the inns where the ship's company were stopping, that their chests must be on board before night, for there was no telling how soon the vessel might be sailing. So Queequeg and I got down our traps, resolving, how- ever, to sleep ashore till the last. But it seems they always give very long notice in these cases, and the ship did not sail for several days. But no wonder ; there was a good deal to be done, and there is no telling how many things to be thought of, before the Pequod was fully equipped. Everyone knows what a multitude of things beds, saucepans, knives and forks, shovels and tongs, napkins, nut -crackers, and what not, are indispensable to the business of housekeeping. Just so with whaling, which necessitates a three -years' housekeeping upon the wide ocean, far from all grocers, costermongers, doctors, bakers, and bankers . And though this also holds true of merchant 120 MOBY-DICK vessels, yet not by any means to the same extent as with whalemen. For besides the great length of the whaling voyage, the numerous articles peculiar to the prosecution of the fishery, and the impossibility of replacing them at the remote harbours usually frequented, it must be remembered, that of all ships, whaling-vessels are the most exposed to accidents of all kinds, and especially to the destruction and loss of the very things upon which the success of the voyage most depends. Hence, the spare boats, spare spars, and spare lines and harpoons, and spare everythings, almost, but a spare captain and duplicate ship. At the period of our arrival at the Island, the heaviest storage of the Pequod had been almost completed ; com- prising her beef, bread, water, fuel, and iron hoops and staves. But, as before hinted, for some time there was a continual fetching and carrying on board of divers odds and ends of things, both large and small. Chief among those who did this fetching and carrying was Captain Bildad's sister, a lean old lady of a most determined and indefatigable spirit, but withal very kind- hearted, who seemed resolved that, if she could help it, nothing should be found wanting in the Pequod, after once fairly getting to sea. At one time she would come on board with a jar of pickles for the steward's pantry ; another time with a bunch of quills for the chief mate's desk, where he kept his log ; a third time with a roll of flannel for the small of some one's rheumatic back. Never did any woman better deserve her name, which was Charity Aunt Charity, as everybody called her. And like a sister of charity did this charitable Aunt Charity bustle about hither and thither, ready to turn her hand and heart to anything that promised to yield safety, comfort, and consolation to all on board a ship in which her beloved brother Bildad was concerned, and in ALL ASTIR 121 which she herself owned a score or two of well-saved dollars. But it was startling to see this excellent-hearted Quakeress coming on board, as she did the last day, with a long oil-ladle in one hand, and a still longer whaling- lance in the other. Nor was Bildad himself nor Captain Peleg at all backward. As for Bildad, he carried about with him a long list of the articles needed, and at every fresh arrival, down went his mark opposite that article upon the paper. Every once and a while Peleg came hobbling out of his whalebone den, roaring at the men down the hatchways, roaring up to the riggers at the mast-head, and then concluded by roaring back into his wigwam. During these days of preparation, Queequeg and I often visited the craft, and as often I asked about Captain Ahab, and how he was, and when he was going to come on board his ship. To these questions they would answer, that he was getting better and better, and was expected aboard every day ; meantime, the two captains, Peleg and Bildad, could attend to everything necessary to fit the vessel for the voyage. If I had been downright honest with myself, I would have seen very plainly in my heart that I did but half fancy being committed this way to so long a voyage, without once laying my eyes on the man who was to be the absolute dictator of it, so soon as the ship sailed out upon the open sea. But when a man suspects any wrong, it sometimes happens that if he be already involved in the matter, he insensibly strives to cover up his suspicions even from himself. And much this way it was with me. I said nothing, and tried to think nothing. At last it was given out that some time next day the ship would certainly sail. So next morning, Queequeg and I took a very early start. CHAPTER XXI GOING ABOARD IT was nearly six o'clock, but only gray imperfect misty dawn, when we drew nigh the wharf. ' There are some sailors running ahead there, if I see right/ said I to Queequeg, ' it can't be shadows ; she 's off by sunrise, I guess ; come on ! ' ' Avast ! ' cried a voice, whose owner at the same time coming close behind us, laid a hand upon both our shoulders, and then insinuating himself between us, stood stooping forward a little, in the uncertain twilight, strangely peering from Queequeg to me. It was Elijah. c Going aboard ? ' ' Hands off, will you,' said I. ' Lookee here,' said Queequeg, shaking himself, ' go 'way ! ' ' Ain't going aboard, then ? ' ' Yes, we are,' said I, ' but what business is that of yours ? Do you know, Mr. Elijah, that I consider you a little impertinent ? ' ' No, no, no ; I wasn't aware of that,' said Elijah, slowly and wonderingly looking from me to Queequeg, with the most unaccountable glances. ' Elijah,' said I, ' you will oblige my friend and me by withdrawing. We are going to the Indian and Pacific Oceans, and would prefer not to be detained.' c Ye be, be ye ? Coming back afore breakfast ? ' ' He 's cracked, Queequeg,' said I ; ' come on.' 122 GOING ABOARD 123 ' Halloa ! ' cried stationary Elijah, hailing us when we had removed a few paces. ' Never mind him/ said I ; ' Queequeg, come on. 5 But he stole up to us again, and suddenly clapping his hand on my shoulder, said, ' Did ye see anything looking like men going toward that ship a while ago ? ' Struck by this plain matter-of-fact question, I answered, saying, ' Yes, I thought I did see four or five men ; but it was too dim to be sure.' ' Very dim, very dim,' said Elijah. ' Morning to ye.' Once more we quitted him ; but once more he came softly after us ; and touching my shoulder again, said, 4 See if you can find 'em now, will ye ? ' ' Find who ? ' * Morning to ye ! morning to ye ! ' he rejoined, again moving off. ' Oh ! I was going to warn ye against but never mind, never mind it 's all one, all in the family too ; sharp frost this morning, ain't it ? Good- bye to ye. Shan't see ye again very soon, I guess ; unless it 's before the Grand Jury.' And with these cracked words he finally departed, leaving me, for the moment, in no small wonderment at his frantic impudence. At last, stepping on board the Peqiiod, we found every- thing in profound quiet, not a soul moving. The cabin entrance was locked within ; the hatches were all on, and lumbered with coils of rigging. Going forward to the forecastle, we found the slide of the scuttle open. Seeing a light, we went down, and found only an old rigger there, wrapped in a tattered pea-jacket. He was thrown at whole length upon two chests, his face downward and enclosed in his folded arms. The profoundest slumber slept upon him. ' Those sailors we saw, Queequeg, where can they have gone to ? ' said I, looking dubiously at the sleeper. But it seemed that, when on the wharf, Queequeg had not at 124 MOBY-DICK all noticed what I now alluded to ; hence I would have thought myself to have been optically deceived in that matter, were it not for Elijah's otherwise inexplicable question. But I beat the thing down ; and again mark- ing the sleeper, jocularly hinted to Queequeg that perhaps we had best sit up with the body ; telling him to estab- lish himself accordingly. He put his hand upon the sleeper's rear, as though feeling if it was soft enough ; and then, without more ado, sat quietly down there. ' Gracious ! Queequeg, don't sit there,' said I. c Oh ! perry dood seat,' said Queequeg, ' my country way ; won't hurt him face.' ' Face ! ' said I, ' call that his face ? very benevolent countenance then ; but how hard he breathes, he ? s heaving himself ; get off, Queequeg, you are heavy, it 's grinding the face of the poor. Get off, Queequeg ! Look, he '11 twitch you off soon. I wonder he don't wake.' Queequeg removed himself to just beyond the head of the sleeper, and lighted his tomahawk-pipe. I sat at the feet. We kept the pipe passing over the sleeper, from one to the other. Meanwhile, upon questioning him in his broken fashion, Queequeg gave me to understand that, in his land, owing to the absence of settees and sofas of all sorts, the king, chiefs, and great people generally, were in the custom of fattening some of the lower orders for ottomans ; and to furnish a house comfortably in that respect, you had only to buy up eight or ten lazy fellows, and lay them round in the piers and alcoves. Besides, it was very convenient on an excursion ; much better than those garden-chairs which are convertible into walking-sticks ; upon occasion, a chief calling his attend- ant, and desiring him to make a settee of himself under a spreading tree, perhaps in some damp marshy place. While narrating these things, every time Queequeg GOING ABOARD 125 received the tomahawk from me, he flourished the hatchet - side of it over the sleeper's head. ' What 's that for, Queequeg ? ' ' Perry easy, kill-e ; oh ! perry easy ! ' He was going on with some wild reminiscences about his tomahawk-pipe, which, it seemed, had in its two uses both brained his foes and soothed his soul, when we were directly attracted to the sleeping rigger. The strong vapour now completely filling the contracted hole, it began to tell upon him. He breathed with a sort of muffledness ; then seemed troubled in the nose ; then revolved over once or twice ; then sat up and rubbed his eyes. 4 Halloa ! ' he breathed at last, ' who be ye smokers ? ' ' Shipped men/ answered I. c When does she sail ? ' ' Ay, ay, ye are going in her, be ye ? She sails to- day. The captain came aboard last night.' ' What captain ? Ahab ? ' ' Who but him indeed ? ' I was going to ask him some further questions concern- ing Ahab, when we heard a noise on deck. ' Halloa ! Starbuck 's astir,' said the rigger. ' He 's a lively chief mate, that ; .good man, and a pious ; but all alive now, I must turn to.' And so saying he went on deck, and we followed. It was now clear sunrise. Soon the crew came on board in twos and threes ; the riggers bestirred themselves ; the mates were actively engaged ; and several of the shore people were busy in bringing various last things on board. Meanwhile Captain Ahab remained invisibly enshrined within his cabin. CHAPTER XXII MERRY CHRISTMAS AT length, toward noon, upon the final dismissal of the ship's riggers, and after the Pequod had been hauled out from the wharf, and after the ever-thoughtful Charity had come off in a whale-boat, with her last gift a night- cap for Stubb, the second mate, her brother-in-law, and a spare Bible for the steward after all this, the two captains, Peleg and Bildad, issued from the cabin, and turning to the chief mate, Peleg said : ' Now, Mr. Starbuck, are you sure everything is right ? Captain Ahab is all ready just spoke to him nothing more to be got from shore, eh ? Well, call all hands, then. Muster 'em aft here blast 'em ! ' ' No need of profane words, however great the hurry, Peleg,' said Bildad, ' but away with thee, friend Starbuck, and do our bidding.' How now ! Here upon the very point of starting for the voyage, Captain Peleg and Captain Bildad were going it with a high hand on the quarter-deck, just as if they were to be joint-commanders at sea, as well as to all appearances in port. And, as for Captain Ahab, no sign of him was yet to be seen ; only, they said he was in the cabin. But then, the idea was, that his presence was by no means necessary in getting the ship under weigh, and steering her well out to sea. Indeed, as that was not at all his proper business, but the pilot's ; and as he was not yet completely recovered so they said therefore, Cap- tain Ahab stayed below. And all this seemed natural 126 MEKRY CHRISTMAS 127 enough ; especially as in the merchant service many captains never show themselves on deck for a consider- able time after heaving up the anchor, but remain over the cabin table, having a farewell merry-making with their shore friends, before they quit the ship for good with the pilot. But there was not much chance to think over the matter, for Captain Peleg was now all alive. He seemed to do most of the talking and commanding, and not Bildad. ' Aft here, ye sons of bachelors,' he cried, as the sailors lingered at the mainmast. ' Mr. Starbuck, drive 'em aft.' ' Strike the tent there ! ' was the next order. As I hinted before, this whalebone marquee was never pitched except in port ; and on board the Pequod, for thirty years, the order to strike the tent was well known to be the next thing to heaving up the anchor. ' Man the capstan ! Blood and thunder ! jump ! ' was the next command, and the crew sprang for the handspikes. Now, in getting under weigh, the station generally occupied by the pilot is the forward part of the ship. And here Bildad, who, with Peleg, be it known, in addi- tion to his other offices, was one of the licensed pilots of the port he being suspected to have got himself made a pilot in order to save the Nantucket pilot -fee to all the ships he was concerned in, for he never piloted any other craft Bildad, I say, might now be seen actively engaged in looking over the bows for the approaching anchor, and at intervals singing what seemed a dismal stave of psalmody, to cheer the hands at the windlass, who roared forth some sort of a chorus about the girls in Booble Alley, with hearty goodwill. Nevertheless, not three days previous, Bildad had told them that no profane songs would be allowed on board the Pequod, particularly in 128 MOBY-DICK getting under weigh ; and Charity, his sister, had placed a small choice copy of Watts in each seaman's berth. Meantime, overseeing the other part of the ship, Captain Peleg ripped and swore astern in the most frightful manner. I almost thought he would sink the ship before the anchor could be got up ; involuntarily I paused on my handspike, and told Queequeg to do the same, thinking of the perils we both ran, in starting on the voyage with such a devil for a pilot. I was comforting myself, how- ever, with the thought that in pious Bildad might be found some salvation, spite of his seven hundred and seventy-seventh lay ; when I felt a sudden sharp poke in my rear, and turning round, was horrified at the apparition of Captain Peleg in the act of withdrawing his leg from my immediate vicinity. That was my first kick. ' Is that the way they heave in the marchant service ? ' he roared. ' Spring, thou sheep-head ; spring, and break thy backbone ! Why don't ye spring, I say, all of ye spring ! Quohag ! spring, thou chap with the red whiskers ; spring there, Scotch-cap ; spring, thou green pants. Spring, I say, all of ye, and spring your eyes out ! ' And so saying, he moved along the windlass, here and there using his leg very freely, while imperturbable Bildad kept leading off with his psalmody. Thinks I, Captain Peleg must have been drinking something to-day. At last the anchor was up, the sails were set, and off we glided. It was a short, cold Christmas ; and as the short northern day merged into night, we found ourselves almost broad upon the wintry ocean, whose freezing spray cased us in ice, as in polished armour. The long rows of teeth on the bulwarks glistened in the moonlight ; and like the white ivory tusks of some huge elephant, vast curving icicles depended from the bows. Lank Bildad, as pilot, headed the first watch, and ever MERRY CHRISTMAS 129 and anon, as the old craft deep dived into the green seas, and sent the shivering frost all over her, and the winds howled, and the cordage rang, his steady notes were heard, * Sweet fields beyond the swelling flood, Stand dressed in living green. So to the Jews old Canaan stood, While Jordan rolled between.' Never did those sweet words sound more sweetly to me than then. They were full of hope and fruition. Spite of this frigid winter night in the boisterous Atlantic, spite of my wet feet and wetter jacket, there was yet, it then seemed to me, many a pleasant haven in store ; and meads and glades so eternally vernal, that the grass shot up by the spring, untrodden, unwilted, remains at midsummer. At last we gained such an offing, that the two pilots were needed no longer. The stout sail-boat that had accompanied us began ranging alongside. It was curious and not unpleasing, how Peleg and Bildad were affected at this juncture, especially Captain Bildad. For loath to depart, yet ; very loath to leave, for good, a ship bound on so long and perilous a voyage beyond both stormy Capes ; a ship in which some thousands of his hard-earned dollars were invested ; a ship, in which an old shipmate sailed as captain ; a man almost as old as he, once more starting to encounter all the terrors of the pitiless jaw ; loath to say good-bye to a thing so every way brimful of every interest to him, poor old Bildad lingered long ; paced the deck with anxious strides ; ran down into the cabin to speak another farewell word there ; again came on deck, and looked to windward ; looked toward the wide and endless waters, only bounded by the * r-off unseen Eastern Continents ; looked toward the VOL. I. I 130 MOBY-DICK land ; looked aloft ; looked right and left ; looked every- where and nowhere ; and at last, mechanically coiling a rope upon its pin, convulsively grasped stout Peleg by the hand, and holding up a lantern, for a moment stood gazing heroically in his face, as much as to say, * Never- theless, friend Peleg, I can stand it ; yes, I can.' As for Peleg himself, he took it more like a philosopher ; but for all his philosophy, there was a tear twinkling in his eye, when the lantern came too near. And he, too, did not a little run from cabin to deck now a word below, and now a word with Starbuck, the chief mate. But, at last, he turned to his comrade, with a final sort of look about him, 4 Captain Bildad come, old ship- mate, we must go. Back the main-yard there ! Boat ahoy ! Stand by to come close alongside, now ! Careful, careful ! come, Bildad, boy say your last. Luck to ye, Starbuck luck to ye, Mr. Stubb luck to ye, Mr. Flask good-bye, and good luck to ye all and this day three years I '11 have a hot supper smoking for ye in old Nantucket. Hurrah and away ! ' ' God bless ye, and have ye in His holy keeping, men/ murmured old Bildad, almost incoherently. ' I hope ye '11 have fine weather now, so that Captain Ahab may soon be moving among ye a pleasant sun is all he needs, and ye '11 have plenty of them in the tropic voyage ye go. Be careful in the hunt, ye mates. Don't stave the boats needlessly, ye harpooneers ; good white cedar plank is raised full three per cent, within the year. Don't forget your prayers, either. Mr. Starbuck, mind that cooper don't waste the spare staves. Oh ! the sail-needles are in the green locker ! Don't whale it too much a Lord's days, men ; but don't miss a fair chance either, that 's rejecting Heaven's good gifts. Have an eye to the molasses tierce, Mr. Stubb ; it was a little leaky, I thought. If ye touch at the islands, Mr. Flask, beware of fornica- MERRY CHRISTMAS 131 tion. Good-bye, good-bye ! Don't keep that cheese too long down in the hold, Mr. Starbuck ; it '11 spoil. Be careful with the butter twenty cents the pound it was, and mind ye, if ' Come, come, Captain Bildad ; stop palavering, away ! ' and with that, Peleg hurried him over the side, and both dropped into the boat. Ship and boat diverged ; the cold, damp night breeze blew between ; a screaming gull flew overhead ; the two hulls wildly rolled ; we gave three heavy-hearted cheers, and blindly plunged like fate into the lone Atlantic. CHAPTER XXIII THE LEE SHORE SOME chapters back, one Bulkington was spoken of, a tall, new-landed mariner, encountered in New Bedford at the inn. When on that shivering winter's night the Pequod thrust her vindictive bows into the cold malicious waves, who should I see standing at her helm but Bulkington ! I looked with sympathetic awe and fearfulness upon the man, who in mid- winter just landed from a four years' dangerous voyage, could so unrestingly push off again for still another tempestuous term. The land seemed scorching to his feet. Wonderfullest things are ever the unmentionable ; deep memories yield no epitaphs ; this six-inch chapter is the stoneless grave of Bulkington. Let me only say that it fared with him as with the storm-tossed ship, that miserably drives along the leeward land. The port would fain give succour ; the port is pitiful ; in the port is safety, comfort, hearthstone, supper, warm blankets, friends, all that 's kind to our mortalities. But in that gale, the port, the land, is that ship's direst jeopardy ; she must fly all hospitality ; one touch of land, though it but graze the keel, would make her shudder through and through. With all her might she crowds all sail off shore ; in so doing, fights 'gainst the very winds that fain would blow her homeward ; seeks all the lashed sea's landlessness again ; for refuge's sake forlornly rushing into peril ; her only friend her bitterest foe ! Know ye, now, Bulkington ? Glimpses do ye seem to 132 THE LEE SHORE 133 see of that mortally intolerable truth ; that all deep, earnest thinking is but the intrepid effort of the soul to keep the open independence of her sea ; while the wildest winds of heaven and earth conspire to cast her on the treacherous, slavish shore ? But as in landlessness alone resides the highest truth, shoreless, indefinite as God so, better is it to perish in that howling infinite, than be ingloriously dashed upon the lee, even if that were safety ! For worm-like, then, oh ! who would craven crawl to land ! Terrors of the terrible ! is all this agony so vain ? Take heart, take heart, Bulkington ! Bear thee grimly, demigod ! Up from the spray of thy ocean-perishing straight up, leaps thy apotheosis ! CHAPTER XXIV THE ADVOCATE As Queequeg and I are now fairly embarked in this busi- ness of whaling ; and as this business of whaling has some- how come to be regarded among landsmen as a rather unpoetical and disreputable pursuit ; therefore, I am all anxiety to convince ye, ye landsmen, of the injustice hereby done to us hunters of whales. In the first place, it may be deemed almost superfluous to establish the fact, that among people at large, the business of whaling is not accounted on a level with what are called the liberal professions. If a stranger were introduced into any miscellaneous metropolitan society, it would but slightly advance the general opinion of his merits, were he presented to the company as a harpooneer, say ; and if in emulation of the naval officers he should append the initials S.W.F. (Sperm Whale Fishery) to his visiting card, such a procedure would be deemed pre- eminently presuming and ridiculous. Doubtless one leading reason why the world declines honouring us whalemen is this : they think that, at best, our vocation amounts to a butchering sort of business ; and that when actively engaged therein, we are surrounded by all manner of defilements. Butchers we are, that is true. But butchers, also, and butchers of the bloodiest badge, have been all Martial Commanders whom the world invariably delights to honour. And as for the matter of the alleged uncleanliness of our business, ye shall soon be initiated into certain facts hitherto pretty generally 134 THE ADVOCATE 185 unknown, and which, upon the whole, will triumphantly plant the sperm whale-ship at least among the cleanliest things of this tidy earth. But even granting the charge in question to be true ; what disordered slippery decks of a whale-ship are comparable to the unspeakable carrion of those battlefields from which so many soldiers return to drink in all ladies' plaudits ? And if the idea of peril so much enhances the popular conceit of the soldier's profession ; let me assure ye that many a veteran who has freely marched up to a battery, would quickly recoil at the apparition of the sperm whale's vast tail, fanning into eddies the air over his head. For what are the comprehensible terrors of man compared with the inter- i linked terrors and wonders of God ! But, though the world scouts at us whale-hunters, yet does it unwittingly pay us the profoundest homage ; yea, an all-abounding adoration ! for almost all the tapers, lamps, and candles that burn round the globe, burn, as before so many shrines, to our glory ! But look at this matter in other lights ; weigh it in all sorts of scales ; see what we whalemen are, and have been. Why did the Dutch in De Witt's time have admirals of their whaling-fleets ? Why did Louis xvi. of France, at his own personal expense, fit out whaling-ships from Dunkirk, and politely invite to that town some score or two of families from our own island of Nantucket ? Why did Britain between the years 1750 and 1788 pay to her whalemen in bounties upward of 1,000,000 ? And lastly, how comes it that we whalemen of America now\ outnumber all the rest of the banded whalemen hi the \ world ; sail a navy of upward of seven hundred vessels ; manned by eighteen thousand men ; yearly consuming 4,000,000 of dollars ; the ships worth, at the time of sailing, $20,000,000 ; and every year importing into our harbours a well-reaped harvest of $7,000,000. How 136 MOBY-DICK comes all this, if there be not something puissant in whaling ? But this is not the half ; look again. I freely assert, that the cosmopolite philosopher cannot, for his life, point out one single peaceful influence, which within the last sixty years has operated more potentially upon the whole broad world, taken in one aggregate, than the high and mighty business of whaling. One way and another, it has begotten events so remarkable in them- selves, and so continuously momentous in their sequential f issues, that whaling may well be regarded as that Egyptian / mother, who bore offspring themselves pregnant from her womb. It would be a hopeless, endless task to catalogue all these things. Let a handful suffice. For many years \ past the whale-ship has been the pioneer in ferreting out the remotest and least known parts of the earth. She has explored seas and archipelagoes which had no chart, where no Cook or Vancouver had ever sailed. If Ameri- can and European men-of-war now peacefully ride in once savage harbours, let them fire salutes to the honour and the glory of the whale-ship, which originally showed them the way, and first interpreted between them and the savages. They may celebrate as they will the heroes of exploring expeditions, your Cooks, your Krusen- sterns ; but I say that scores of anonymous captains have sailed out of Nantucket, that were as great, and greater than your Cook and your Krusenstern. For in their succourless empty-handedness, they, in the heathen- ish sharked waters, and by the beaches of unrecorded, javelin islands, battled with virgin wonders and terrors that Cook with all his marines and muskets would not willingly have dared. All that is made such a flourish of in the old South Sea Voyages, those things were but the lifetime commonplaces of our heroic Nantucketers. Often, adventures which Vancouver dedicates three THE ADVOCATE 137 chapters to, these men accounted unworthy of being set down in the ship's common log. Ah, the world ! Oh, the world ! Until the whale-fishery rounded Cape Horn, no com- merce but colonial, scarcely any intercourse but colonial, was carried on between Europe and the long line of the opulent Spanish provinces on the Pacific coast. It was the whaleman who first broke through the jealous policy of the Spanish crown, touching those colonies ; and, if space permitted, it might be distinctly shown how from those whalemen at last eventuated the liberation of Peru, Chili, and Bolivia from the yoke of Old Spain, and the establishment of the eternal democracy in those parts. That great America on the other side of the sphere, Australia, was given to the enlightened world by the whaleman. After its first blunder-born discovery by a Dutchman, all other ships long shunned those shores as pestiferously barbarous ; but the whale -ship touched there. The whale-ship is the true mother of that now mighty colony. Moreover, in the infancy of the first Australian settlement, the emigrants were several times saved from starvation by the benevolent biscuit of the whale -ship luckily dropping an anchor in their waters. The uncounted isles of all Polynesia confess the same truth, and do commercial homage to the whale-ship, that cleared the way for the missionary and the merchant, and in many cases carried the primitive missionaries to their first destinations. If that double -bolted land, Japan, is ever to become hospitable, it is the whale-ship alone to whom the credit will be due ; for already she is on the threshold. But if, in the face of all this, you still declare that whaling has no aesthetically noble associations connected with it, then am I ready to shiver fifty lances with you jre, and unhorse you with a split helmet every time. 138 MOBY-DICK The whale has no famous author, and whaling no famous chronicler, you will say. The whale no famous author, and whaling no famous chronicler ? Who wrote the first account of our levia- than ? Who but mighty Job ! And who composed the first narrative of a whaling voyage ? Who, but no less a prince than Alfred the Great, who, with his own royal pen, took down the words from Other, the Norwegian whale -hunter of those times ! And who pronounced our glowing eulogy in Parliament ? Who, but Edmund Burke ! True enough, but then whalemen themselves are poor devils ; they have no good blood in their veins. No good blood in their veins ? They have something better than royal blood there. The grandmother of Benjamin Franklin was Mary Morrel ; afterward, by marriage, Mary Folger, one of the old settlers of Nantucket ? and the ancestress to a long line of Folgers and har- pooneers all kith and kin to noble Benjamin this day darting the barbed iron from one side of the world to the other. Good again ; but then all confess that somehow whal- ing is not respectable. Whaling not respectable ? Whaling is imperial ! By old English statutory law, the whale is declared 'a royal fish.' l Oh, that 's only nominal ! The whale himself has never figured in any grand imposing way. The whale never figured in any grand imposing way ? In one of the mighty triumphs given to a Roman general upon his entering the world's capital, the bones of a whale, brought all the way from the Syrian coast, were the most conspicuous object in the cymballed procession. 1 Grant it, since you cite it ; but, say what you will, there is no real dignity in whaling. 1 See subsequent chapters for something more on this head. THE ADVOCATE 139 No dignity in whaling ? The dignity of our calling the very heavens attest. Cetus is a constellation in the south ! No more ! Drive down your hat in presence of the Czar, and take it off to Queequeg ! No more ! I know a man that, in his lifetime, has taken three hundred and fifty whales. I account that man more honourable than that great captain of antiquity who boasted of taking as many walled towns. And, as for me, if, by any possibility, there be any as yet undiscovered prime thing in me ; if I shall ever deserve any real repute in that small but high hushed world which I might not be unreasonably ambitious of ; if hereafter I shall do anything that, upon the whole, a man might rather have done than to have left undone ; if, at my death, my executors, or more properly my creditors, find any precious MSS. in my desk, then here I prospectively ascribe all the honour and the glory to whaling ; for a whale -ship was my Yale College and my Harvard. CHAPTER XXV POSTSCRIPT IN behalf of the dignity of whaling, I would fain advance naught but substantiated facts. But after embattling his facts, an advocate who should wholly suppress a not unreasonable surmise, which might tell eloquently upon his cause such an advocate, would he not be blameworthy ? It is well known that at the coronation of kings and queens, even modern ones, a certain curious process of seasoning them for their functions is gone through. There is a salt-cellar of state, so called, and there may be a castor of state. How they use the salt, precisely who knows ? Certain I am, however, that a king's head is solemnly oiled at his coronation, even as a head of salad. Can it be, though, that they anoint it with a view of making its interior run well, as they anoint machinery ? Much might be ruminated here, concerning the essential dignity of this regal process, because in common life we esteem but meanly and contemptibly a fellow who anoints his hair, and palpably smells of that anointing. In truth, a mature man who uses hair-oil, unless medicinally, that man has probably got a quoggy spot in him somewhere. As a general rule, he can't amount to much in his totality. But the only thing to be considered here, is this what kind of oil is used at coronations ? Certainly it cannot be olive oil, nor macassar oil, nor castor oil, nor bear's oil, nor train oil, nor cod-liver oil. What then can it possibly be, but sperm oil in its unmanufactured, unpolluted state, the sweetest of all oils ? Think of that, ye loyal Britons ! we whalemen supply your kings and queens with coronation stuff ! 140 CHAPTER XXVI KNIGHTS AND SQUIRES THE chief mate of the Pequod was Starbuck, a native of Nantucket, and a Quaker by descent. He was a long, earnest man, and though born on an icy coast, seemed well adapted to endure hot latitudes, his flesh being hard as twice-baked biscuit. Transported to the Indies, his live blood would not spoil like bottled ale. He must have been born in some time of general drought and famine, or upon one of those fast days for which his state is famous. Only some thirty arid summers had he seen ; those summers had dried up all his physical superfluous- ness. But this, his thinness, so to speak, seemed no more the token of wasting anxieties and cares, than it seemed the indication of any bodily blight. It was merely the condensation of the man. He was by no means ill-look- ing ; quite the contrary. His pure tight skin was an excellent fit ; and closely wrapped up in it, and embalmed with inner health and strength, like a revivified Egyptian, this Starbuck seemed prepared to endure for long ages to come, and to endure always, as now ; for be it Polar snow or torrid sun, like a patent chronometer, his interior vitality was warranted to do well in all climates. Look- ing into his eyes, you seemed to see there the yet lingering images of those thousand-fold perils he had calmly con- fronted through life. A staid, steadfast man, whose life for the most part was a telling pantomime of action, and not a tame chapter of sounds. Yet, for all his hardy >briety and fortitude, there were certain qualities in 141 142 MOBY-DICK him which at times affected, and in some cases seemed well- nigh to overbalance all the rest. Uncommonly con- scientious for a seaman, and endued with a deep natural reverence, the wild watery loneliness of his life did there- fore strongly incline him to superstition ; but to that sort of superstition, which in some organisations seems rather to spring, somehow, from intelligence than from ignorance. Outward portents and inward presentiments were his. And if at times these things bent the welded iron of his soul, much more did his far-away domestic memories of his young Cape wife and child tend to bend him still more from the original ruggedness of his nature, and open him still further to those latent influences which, in some honest-hearted men, restrain the gush of dare- devil daring, so often evinced by others in the more perilous vicissitudes of the fishery. ' I will have no man in my boat/ said Starbuck, ' who is not afraid of a whale.' By this, he seemed to mean, not only that the most reliable and useful courage was that which arises from the fair estimation of the encountered peril, but that an utterly fearless man is a far more dangerous comrade than a coward. ' Ay, ay/ said Stubb, the second mate, ' Starbuck, there, is as careful a man as you '11 find anywhere in this fishery.' But we shall ere long see what that word ' careful ' precisely means when used by a man like Stubb, or almost any other whale-hunter. Starbuck was no crusader after perils ; in him courage was not a sentiment ; but a thing simply useful to him, and always at hand upon all mortally practical occasions. Besides, he thought, perhaps, that hi this business of whaling, courage was one of the great staple outfits of the ship, like her beef and her bread, and not to be foolishly wasted. Wherefore he had no fancy for lowering for whales after sundown ; nor for persisting in fighting a KNIGHTS AND SQUIRES 143 fish that too much persisted in fighting him. For, thought Starbuck, I am here in this critical ocean to kill whales for my living, and not to be killed by them for theirs ; and that hundreds of men had been so killed Starbuck well knew. What doom was his own father's ? Where, in the bottomless deeps, could he find the torn limbs of his brother ? With memories like these in him, and, moreover, given to a certain superstitiousness, as has been said ; the courage of this Starbuck which could, nevertheless, still flourish, must indeed have been extreme. But it was not in reasonable nature that a man so organised, and with such terrible experiences and remembrances as he had ; it was not in nature that these things should fail in latently engendering an element in him, which, under suitable circumstances, would break out from its confinement, and burn all his courage up. And brave as he might be, it was that sort of bravery chiefly, visible in some intrepid men, which, while generally abiding firm in the conflict with seas, or winds, or whales, or any of the ordinary irrational horrors of the world, yet cannot withstand those more terrific, because more spiritual terrors, which sometimes menace you from the concentrating brow of an enraged and mighty man. But were the coming narrative to reveal, in any instance, the complete abasement of poor Starbuck's fortitude, scarce might I have the heart to write it ; for it is a thing most sorrowful, nay shocking, to expose the fall of valour in the soul. Men may seem detestable as joint-stock companies and nations ; knaves, fools, and murderers there may be ; men may have mean and meagre aces ; but man, hi the ideal, is so noble and so sparkling, such a grand and glowing creature, that over any ignominious blemish in him all his fellows should run to throw their costliest robes. That immaculate manliness we feel 144 MOBY-DICK within ourselves, so far within us, that it remains intact though all the outer character seem gone, bleeds with keenest anguish at the undraped spectacle of a valour- ruined man. Nor can piety itself, at such a shameful sight, completely stifle her upbraidings against the per- mitting stars. But this august dignity I treat of, is not the dignity of kings and robes, but that abounding dignity which has no robed investiture. Thou shalt see it shining in the arm that wields a pick or drives a spike ; that democratic dignity which, on all hands, radiates without end from God ; Himself ! The great God absolute ! The centre and circumference of all democracy ! His omnipresence, our divine equality ! If, then, to meanest mariners, and renegades and casta- ways, I shall hereafter ascribe high qualities, though dark ; weave round them tragic graces ; if even the most mourn- ful, perchance the most abased, among them all, shall at times lift himself to the exalted mounts ; if I shall touch that workman's arm with some ethereal light ; if I shall spread a rainbow over his disastrous set of sun ; then against all mortal critics bear me out in it, thou just Spirit of Equality, which hast spread one royal mantle of humanity over all my kind ! Bear me out in it, thou great democratic God ! who didst not refuse to the swart convict, Bunyan, the pale, poetic pearl ; Thou who didst clothe with doubly hammered leaves of finest gold, the stumped and paupered arm of old Cervantes ; Thou who didst pick up Andrew Jackson from the pebbles ; who didst hurl him upon a war-horse ; who didst thunder him higher than a throne ! Thou who, in all Thy mighty, earthly marchings, ever cullest Thy selectest champions from the kingly commons ; bear me out in it, God ! CHAPTER XXVII KNIGHTS AND SQUIRES STUBB was the second mate. He was a native of Cape Cod ; and hence, according to local usage, was called a Cape-Cod-man. A happy-go-lucky ; neither craven nor valiant ; taking perils as they came with an indifferent air ; and while engaged in the most imminent crisis of the chase, toiling away, calm and collected as a journey- man joiner engaged for the year. Good-humoured, easy, and careless, he presided over his whale-boat as if the most deadly encounter were but a dinner, and his crew all invited guests. He was as particular about the com- fortable arrangement of his part of the boat, as an old stage-driver is about the snugness of his box. When close to the whale, in the very death-lock of the fight, he handled his unpitying lance coolly and off-handedly, as a whistling tinker his hammer. He would hum over his old rigadig tunes while flank and flank with the most exasperated monster. Long usage had, for this Stubb, converted the jaws of death into an easy-chair. What he thought of death itself, there is no telling. Whether he ever thought of it at all, might be a question ; but, if he ever did chance to cast his mind that way after a com- fortable dinner, no doubt, like a good sailor, he took it to be a sort of call of the watch to tumble aloft, and bestir themselves there, about something which he would find out when he obeyed the order, and not sooner. What, perhaps, with other things, made Stubb such an easy-going, unfearing man, so cheerily trudging off with VOL. i. K 146 MOBY-DICK the burden of life in a world full of grave peddlers, all bowed to the ground with their packs ; what helped to bring about that almost impious good-humour of his ; that thing must have been his pipe. For, like his nose, his short, black little pipe was one of the regular features of his face. You would almost as soon have expected him to turn out of his bunk without his nose as without his pipe. He kept a whole row of pipes there ready loaded, stuck in a rack, within easy reach of his hand ; and, whenever he turned in, he smoked them all out in suc- cession, lighting one from the other to the end of the chapter ; then loading them again to be in readiness anew. For, when Stubb dressed, instead of first putting his legs into his trowsers, he put his pipe into his mouth. I say this continual smoking must have been one cause, at least, of his peculiar disposition ; for everyone knows that this earthly air, whether ashore or afloat, is terribly infected with the nameless miseries of the number- less mortals who have died exhaling it ; and as in time of the cholera, some people go about with a camphorated handkerchief to their mouths ; so, likewise, against all mortal tribulations, Stubb 's tobacco smoke might have operated as a sort of disinfecting agent. The third mate was Flask, a native of Tisbury, in Martha's Vineyard. A short, stout, ruddy young fellow, very pugnacious concerning whales, who somehow seemed to think that the great leviathans had personally and hereditarily affronted him ; and therefore it was a sort of point of honour with him, to destroy them whenever encountered. So utterly lost was he to all sense of reverence for the many marvels of their majestic bulk and mystic ways ; and so dead to anything like an appre- hension of any possible danger from encountering them ; that in his poor opinion, the wondrous whale was but a species of magnified mouse, or at least water-rat, requiring KNIGHTS AND SQUIRES 147 only a little circumvention and some small application of time and trouble in order to kill and boil. This ignor- ant, unconscious fearlessness of his made him a little waggish in the matter of whales ; he followed these fish for the fun of it ; and a three years' voyage round Cape Horn was only a jolly joke that lasted that length of time. As a carpenter's nails are divided into wrought nails and cut nails ; so mankind may be similarly divided. Little Flask was one of the wrought ones ; made to clinch tight and last long. They called him King-Post on board of the Pequod ; because, in form, he could be well likened to the short, square timber known by that name in Arctic whalers ; and which by the means of many radiating side timbers inserted into it, served to brace the ship against the icy concussions of those battering seas. Now these three mates Starbuck, Stubb, and Flask were momentous men. They it was who by universal prescription commanded three of the Pequod' & boats as | headsmen. In that grand order of battle in which Gap- tain Ahab would probably marshal his forces to descend on the whales, these three headsmen were as captains of companies. Or, being armed with their long keen whaling-spears, they were as a picked trio of lancers ; even as the harpooneers were flingers of javelins. And since in this famous fishery, each mate or heads- man, like a Gothic knight of old, is always accompanied by his boat-steerer or harpooneer, who in certain con- junctures provides him with a fresh lance, when the former one has been badly twisted, or elbowed in the assault ; and moreover, as there generally subsists between the two a close intimacy and friendliness ; it is therefore but meet, that in this place we set down who the Pequod 's harpooneers were, and to what headsman each of them belonged. First of all was Queequeg, whom Starbuck, the chief 148 MOBY-DICK mate, had selected for his squire. But Queequeg is already known. Next was Tashtego, an unmixed Indian from Gay Head, the most westerly promontory of Martha's Vine- yard, where there still exists the last remnant of a village of red men, which has long supplied the neighbouring island of Nantucket with many of her most daring har- pooneers. In the fishery, they usually go by the generic name of Gay-Headers. Tashtego 's long, lean, sable hair, his high cheek-bones, and black rounding eyes for an Indian, Oriental in their largeness, but Antarctic in their glittering expression all this sufficiently proclaimed him an inheritor of the unvitiated blood of those proud warrior hunters, who, in quest of the great New England moose, had scoured, bow in hand, the aboriginal forests of the main. But no longer snuffing in the trail of the wild beasts of the woodland, Tashtego now hunted in the wake of the great whales of the sea ; the unerring harpoon of the son fitly replacing the infallible arrow of the sires. To look at the tawny brawn of his lithe snaky limbs, you would almost have credited the superstitions of some of the earlier Puritans, and half-believed this wild Indian to be a son of the Prince of the Powers of the Air. Tash- tego was Stubb the second mate's squire. Third among the harpooneers was Daggoo, a gigantic, coal - black negro-savage, with a lion -like tread an Ahasuerus to behold. Suspended from his ears were two golden hoops, so large that the sailors called them ring-bolts, and would talk of securing the topsail halyards to them. In his youth Daggoo had voluntarily shipped on board of a whaler, lying in a lonely bay on his native coast. And never having been anywhere in the world but in Africa, Nantucket, and the pagan harbours most frequented by whalemen ; and having now led for many years the bold life of the fishery in the ships of owners un- I KNIGHTS AND SQUIRES 149 commonly heedful of what manner of men they shipped ; Daggoo retained all his barbaric virtues, and erect as a giraffe, moved about the decks in all the pomp of six feet five in his socks. There was a corporeal humility in looking up at him ; and a white man standing before him seemed a white flag come to beg truce of a fortress. Curious to tell, this imperial negro, Ahasuerus Daggoo, was the squire of little Flask, who looked like a chess-man beside him. As for the residue of the Pequod'B company, be it said, that at the present day not one in two of the many thousand men before the mast employed in the American whale-fishery are Americans born, though pretty nearly all the officers are. Herein it is the same with the American whale-fishery as with the American army and military and merchant navies, and the engineering forces employed in the construction of the American canals and railroads. The same, I say, because in all these cases the native American liberally provides the brains, the rest of the world as generously supplying the muscles. No small number of these whaling seamen belong to the Azores, where the outward-bound Nan- tucket whalers frequently touch to augment their crews from the hardy peasants of those rocky shores. In like manner, the Greenland whalers sailing out of Hull or London put in at the Shetland Islands, to receive the full complement of their crew. Upon the passage home- ward, they drop them there again. How it is, there is no telling, but Islanders seem to make the best whalemen. They were nearly all Islanders in the Pequod, ' Isolatoes ' too, I call such, not acknowledging the common continent of men, but each Isolate living on a separate continent of his own. Yet now, federated along one keel, what a set these Isolatoes were ! An Anacharsis Clootz deputa- tion from all the isles of the sea, and all the ends of the earth, accompanying Old Ahab in the Pequod to lay the 150 MOBY-DICK world's grievances before that bar from which not very many of them ever come back. Black Little Pip he never did oh, no ! he went before. Poor Alabama boy ! On the grim Pequod's forecastle, ye shall ere long see him, beating his tambourine ; prelusive of the eternal time, when sent for, to the great quarter-deck on high, he was bid strike in with angels, and beat his tambourine in glory ; called a coward here, hailed a hero there ! CHAPTER XXVIII AHAB FOB several days after leaving Nantucket, nothing above hatches was seen of Captain Ahab. The mates regularly relieved each other at the watches, and for aught that could be seen to the contrary, they seemed to be the only commanders of the ship ; only they sometimes issued from the cabin with orders so sudden and peremptory, that after all it was plain they but commanded vicariously. Yes, their supreme lord and dictator was there, though hitherto unseen by any eyes not permitted to penetrate into the now sacred retreat of the cabin. Every time I ascended to the deck from my watches below, I instantly gazed aft to mark if any strange face were visible ; for my first vague disquietude touching the unknown captain, now in the seclusion of the sea, became almost a perturbation. This was strangely heightened at times by the ragged Elijah's diabolical incoherences uninvitingly recurring to me, with a subtle energy I could not have before conceived of. But poorly could I withstand them, much as in other moods I was almost ready to smile at the solemn whimsicalities of that outlandish prophet of the wharves. But whatever it was of apprehensiveness or uneasiness to call it so which I felt, yet whenever I came to look about me in the ship, it seemed against all warranty to cherish such emotions. For though the harpooneers, with the great body of the crew, were a far more barbaric, heathenish, and motley set than any of the tame merchant-ship companies which 151 152 MOBY-DICK my previous experiences had made me acquainted with, still I ascribed this and rightly ascribed it to the fierce uniqueness of the very nature of that wild Scandinavian vocation in which I had so abandonedly embarked. But it was especially the aspect of the three chief officers of the ship, the mates, which was most forcibly calculated to allay these colourless misgivings, and induce confidence and cheerfulness in every presentment of the voyage. Three better, more likely sea-officers and men, each in his own different way, could not readily be found, and they were every one of them Americans ; a Nantucketer, a Vineyarder, a Cape man. Now, it being Christmas when the ship shot from out her harbour, for a space we had biting Polar weather, though all the time running away from it to the southward ; and by every degree and minute of latitude which we sailed, gradually leaving that merciless winter, and all its intolerable weather behind us. It was one of those less lowering, but still gray and gloomy enough mornings of the transition, when with a fair wind the ship was rushing through the water with a vindictive sort of leaping and melancholy rapidity, that as I mounted to the deck at the call of the forenoon watch, so soon as I levelled my glance toward the tanrail, foreboding shivers ran over me. Reality outran appre- hension ; .Captain Ahab stood upon his quarter-deck. There seemed no sign of common bodily illness about him, nor of the recovery from any. He looked like a man cut away from the stake, when the fire has overrunningly wasted all the limbs without consuming them, or taking away one particle from their compacted aged robustness. His whole high, broad form, seemed made of solid bronze, and shaped in an unalterable mould, like Cellini's cast Perseus. Threading its way out from among his gray hairs, and continuing right down one side of his tawny scorched face and neck, till it disappeared in his clothing, AHAB 153 you saw a slender rod-like mark, lividly whitish. It resembled that perpendicular seam sometimes made in the straight, lofty trunk of a great tree, when the upper lightning tearingly darts down it, and without wrenching a single twig, peels and grooves out the bark from top to bottom, ere running off into the soil, leaving the tree still greenly alive, but branded. Whether that mark was born with him, or whether it was the scar left by some desperate wound, no one could certainly say. By some tacit con- sent, throughout the voyage little or no allusion was made to it, especially by the mates. But once Tashtego's senior, an old Gay-Head Indian among the crew, super- stitiously asserted that not till he was full forty years old did Ahab become that way branded, and then it came upon him, not in the fury of any mortal fray, but in an elemental strife at sea. Yet, this wild hint seemed inferentially negatived by what a gray Manxman in- sinuated, an old sepulchral man, who, having never before sailed out of Nantucket, had never ere this laid eye upon wild Ahab. Nevertheless, the old sea-traditions, the immemorial credulities, popularly invested this old Manxman with preternatural powers of discernment. So that no white sailor seriously contradicted him when he said that if ever Captain Ahab should be tranquilly laid out which might hardly come to pass, so he muttered then, whoever should do that last office for the dead would find a birth-mark on him from crown to sole. So powerfully did the whole grim aspect of Ahab affect me, and the livid brand which streaked it, that for the first few moments I hardly noted that not a little of this overbearing grimness was owing to the barbaric white leg upon which he partly stood. It had previously come to me that this ivory leg had at sea been fashioned from the polished bone of the sperm whale's jaw. * Ay, he was dismasted off Japan,' said the old Gay-Head Indian 154 MOBY-DICK once ; ' but like his dismasted craft, he shipped another mast without coming home for it. He has a quiver of 'em.' I was struck with the singular posture he maintained. Upon each side of the Pequod's quarter-deck, and pretty close to the mizen shrouds, there was an auger-hole, bored about half an inch or so, into the plank. His bone leg steadied in that hole ; one arm elevated, and holding by a shroud ; Captain Ahab stood erect, looking straight out beyond the ship's ever-pitching prow. There was an infinity of firmest fortitude, a determinate, unsurrender- able wilfulness, in the fixed and fearless, forward dedi- cation of that glance. Not a word he spoke ; nor did his officers say aught to him ; though by all their minutest gestures and expressions, they plainly showed the uneasy, if not painful, consciousness of being under a troubled master-eye. And not only that, but moody stricken Ahab stood before them with a crucifixion in his face ; in all the nameless regal overbearing dignity of some mighty woe. Ere long, from his first visit in the air, he withdrew into his cabin. But after that morning, he was every day visible to the crew ; either standing in his pivot -hole, or seated upon an ivory stool he had ; or heavily walking the deck. As the sky grew less gloomy ; indeed, began to grow a little genial, he became still less and less a recluse ; as if, when the ship had sailed from home, nothing but the dead wintry bleakness of the sea had then kept him so secluded. And, by and by, it came to pass, that he was almost continually in the air ; but, as yet, for all that he said, or perceptibly did, on the at last sunny deck, he seemed as unnecessary there as another mast. But the Pequod was only making a passage now ; not regularly cruising ; nearly all whaling preparatives needing super- vision the mates were fully competent to, so that there was little or nothing, out of himself, to employ or excite AHAB 155 Ahab now ; and thus chase away, for that one interval, the clouds that layer upon layer were piled upon his brow, as ever all clouds choose the loftiest peaks to pile themselves upon. Nevertheless, ere long, the warm, warbling persuasive- ness of the pleasant, holiday weather we came to, seemed gradually to charm him from his mood. For, as when the red-cheeked, dancing girls, April and May, trip home to the wintry, misanthropic woods ; even the barest, ruggedest, most thunder-cloven old oak will at least send forth some few green sprouts, to welcome such glad- hearted visitants ; so Ahab did, in the end, a little respond to the playful allurings of that girlish air. More than once did he put forth the faint blossom of a look, which, in any other man, would have soon flowered out in a smile. CHAPTER XXIX TO HIM, STUBB SOME days elapsed, and ice and icebergs all astern, the Pequod now went rolling through the bright Quito spring, which, at sea, almost perpetually reigns on the threshold of the eternal August of the Tropic. The warmly cool, clear, ringing, perfumed, overflowing, redundant days, were as crystal goblets of Persian sherbet, heaped up flaked up, with rose-water snow. The starred and stately nights seemed haughty dames in jewelled velvets, nursing at home in lonely pride, the memory of their absent conquering Earls, the golden helmeted suns ! For sleeping man, 'twas hard to choose between such winsome days and such seducing nights. But all the witcheries of that unwaning weather did not merely lend new spells and potencies to the outward world. Inward they turned upon the soul, especially when the still mild hours of eve came on ; then, memory shot her crystals as the clear ice most forms of noiseless twilights. And all these subtle agencies, more and more they wrought on Ahab's texture. Old age is always wakeful ; as if, the longer linked with life, the less man has to do with aught that looks like death. Among sea-commanders, the old graybeards will oftenest leave their berths to visit the night-cloaked deck. It was so with Ahab ; only that now, of late, he seemed so much to live in the open air, that truly speaking, his visits were more to the cabin, than from the cabin to the planks. ' It feels like going down into one's tomb,' 156 ENTER AHAB 157 he would mutter to himself, ' for an old captain like me to be descending this narrow scuttle, to go to my grave- dug berth/ So, almost every twenty-four hours, when the watches of the night were set, and the band on deck sentinelled the slumbers of the band below ; and when if a rope was to be hauled upon the forecastle, the sailors flung it not rudely down, as by day, but with some cautiousness dropped it to its place, for fear of disturbing their slumber- ing shipmates ; when this sort of steady quietude would begin to prevail, habitually, the silent steersman would watch the cabin-scuttle ; and ere long the old man would emerge, gripping at the iron banister, to help his crippled way. Some considerating touch of humanity was in him ; for at times like these, he usually abstained from patrolling the quarter-deck ; because to his wearied mates, seeking repose within six inches of his ivory heel, such would have been the reverberating crack and din of that bony step, that their dreams would have been of the crunching teeth of sharks. But once, the mood was on him too deep for common regardings ; and as with heavy, lumber-like pace he was measuring the ship from tanrail to mainmast, Stubb, the odd second mate, came up from below, and with a certain unassured, deprecating humorousness, hinted that if Captain Ahab was pleased to walk the planks, then, no one could say nay ; but there might be some way of muffling the noise ; hinting something indistinctly and hesitatingly about a globe of tow, and the insertion into it, of the ivory heel. Ah ! Stubb, thou didst not know Ahab then. ' Am I a cannon-ball, Stubb/ said Ahab, ' that thou wouldst wad me that fashion ? But go thy ways ; I had forgot. Below to thy nightly grave ; where such as ye sleep between shrouds, to use ye to the filling one at last. Down, dog, and kennel ! ' 158 MOBY-DICK {Starting at the unforeseen concluding exclamation of the so suddenly scornful old man, Stubb was speechless a moment ; then said excitedly, ' I am not used to be spoken to that way, sir ; I do but less than half like it, sir.' ' Avast ! ' gritted Ahab between his set teeth, and violently moving away, as if to avoid some passionate temptation. ' No, sir ; not yet,' said Stubb, emboldened. ' I will not tamely be called a dog, sir.' ' Then be called ten times a donkey, and a mule, and an ass, and begone, or I 11 clear the world of thee ! ' As he said this, Ahab advanced upon him with such overbearing terrors in his aspect, that Stubb involuntarily retreated. ' I was never served so before without giving a hard blow for it,' muttered Stubb, as he found himself descending the cabin-scuttle. ' It 's very queer. Stop, Stubb ; somehow, now, I don't well know whether to go back and strike him, or what 's that ? down here on my knees and pray for him ? Yes, that was the thought coming up in me ; but it would be the first time I ever did pray. It 's queer ; very queer ; and he 's queer too ; ay, take him fore and aft, he 's about the queerest old man Stubb ever sailed with. How he flashed at me ! his eyes like powder-pans ! is he mad ? Anyway there 's something on his mind, as sure as there must be something on a deck when it cracks. He ain't in his bed now, either, more than three hours out of the twenty-four ; and he don't sleep then. Didn't that Dough-Boy, the steward, tell me that of a morning he always finds the old man's ham- mock clothes all rumpled and tumbled, and the sheets down at the foot, and the coverlid almost tied into knots, and the pillow a sort of frightful hot, as though a baked brick had been on it ? A hot old man ! I guess he 's ENTER AHAB 159 got what some folks ashore call a conscience ; it 's a kind of Tic-Dolly-row they say worse nor a toothache. Well, well ; I don't know what it is, but the Lord keep me from catching it. He 's full of riddles ; I wonder what he goes into the after-hold for, every night, as Dough -Boy tells me he suspects ; what 's that for, I should like to know ? Who 's made appointments with him in the hold ? Ain't that queer, now ? But there 's no telling, it 's the old game. Here goes for a snooze. Damn me, it 's worth a fellow's while to be born into the world, if only to fall right asleep. And now that I think of it, that 's about the first thing babies do, and that 's a sort of queer, too. Damn me, but all things are queer, come to think of 'em. But that 's against my principles. Think not, is my eleventh, commandment ; and sleep when you can, is my twelfth. "feo here goes again. But how 's that ? didn't he call me a dog ? blazes ! he called me ten times a donkey, and piled a lot of jackasses on top of that \ He might as well have kicked me, and done with it. Maybe he did kick me, and I didn't observe it, I was so taken all aback with his brow, somehow. It flashed like a bleached bone. What the devil 's the matter with me ? I don't stand right on my legs. Coming afoul of that old man has a sort of turned me wrong side out. By the Lord, I must have been dreaming, though How 1 how ? how ? but the only way 's to stash it ; so here goes to hammock again ; and in the morning, I '11 see how this plaguy juggling thinks over by daylight.' CHAPTER XXX THE PIPE WHEN Stubb had departed, Ahab stood for a while leaning over the bulwarks ; and then, as had been usual with him of late, calling a sailor of the watch, he sent him below for his ivory stool, and also his pipe. Lighting the pipe at the binnacle lamp and planting the stool on the weather- side of the deck, he sat and smoked. In old Norse times, the thrones of the sea-loving Danish kings were fabricated, saith tradition, of the tusks of the narwhale. How could one look at Ahab then, seated on that tripod of bones, without bethinking him of the royalty it symbolised ? For a khan of the plank, and a king of the sea, and a great lord of leviathans was Ahab. Some moments passed, during which the thick vapour came from his mouth in quick and constant puffs, which blew back again into his face. ' How now, ' he soliloquised at last, withdrawing the tube, 'this smoking no longer soothes. Oh, my pipe ! hard must it go with me if thy charm be gone ! Here have I been unconsciously toiling, not pleasuring, ay, and ignorantly smoking to windward all the while ; to windward, and with such nervous whiffs, as if, like the dying whale, my final jets were the strongest and fullest of trouble. What business have I with this pipe ? This thing that is meant for sereneness, to send up mild white vapours among mild white hairs, not among torn iron -gray locks like mine. I '11 smoke no more He tossed the still lighted pipe into the sea. The fire hissed in the waves ; the same instant the ship shot by the bubble the sinking pipe made. With slouched hat, Ahab lurchingly paced the planks. 160 CHAPTER XXXI QUEEN MAB NEXT morning Stubb accosted Flask. ' Such a queer dream, King-Post, I never had. You know the old man's ivory leg, well I dreamed he kicked me with it ; and when I tried to kick back, upon my soul, my little man, I kicked my leg right off ! And then, presto ! Ahab seemed a pyramid, and I, like a blazing fool, kept kicking at it. But what was still more curious, Flask you know how curious all dreams are through all this rage that I was in, I somehow seemed to be think- ing to myself, that after all, it was not much of an insult, that kick from Ahab. " Why," thinks I, " what 's the row ? It 's not a real leg, only a false leg." And there 's a mighty difference between a living thump and a dead thump. That 's what makes a blow from the hand, Flask, fifty times more savage to bear than a blow from a cane. The living member that makes the living insult, my little man. And thinks I to myself afl the wnile, mind, while I was stubbing my silly toes against that cursed pyramid so confoundedly contradictory was it all, all the while, I say, I was thinking to myself, "What 's his leg now, but a cane a whalebone cane. Yes," thinks I, "it was only a playful cudgelling in fact, only a whaleboning that he gave me not a base kick. Be- sides," thinks I, " look at it once ; why, the end of it the foot part what a small sort of end it is ; whereas, if a broad-footed farmer kicked me, there 's a devilish broad insult. But this insult is whittled down to a point only." VOL. I. L 162 MOBY-DICK But now comes the greatest joke of the dream, Flask. While I was battering away at the pyramid, a sort of badger-haired old merman, with a hump on his back, takes me by the shoulders, and slews me round. " What are you 'bout ? " says he. Slid ! man, but I was frightened. Such a phiz ! But, somehow, next moment I was over the fright. " What am I about ? " says I at last. " And what business is that of yours, I should like to know, Mr. Humpback ? Do you want a kick ? " By the lord, Flask, I had no sooner said that, than he turned round his stern to me, bent over, and dragging up a lot of seaweed he had for a clout what do you think I saw ? why, thunder alive, man, his stern was stuck full of marling-spikes, with the points out. Says I, on second thoughts, " I guess I won't kick you, old fellow." " Wise Stubb," said he, " wise Stubb " ; and kept muttering it all the time, a sort of eating of his own gums like a chimney hag. Seeing he wasn't going to stop saying over his " wise Stubb, wise Stubb," I thought I might as well fall to kicking the pyramid again. But I had only just lifted my foot for it, when he roared out, " Stop that kicking ! " " Halloa," says I, " what 's the matter now, old fellow ? " " Look ye here," says he ; " let 's argue the insult. Captain Ahab kicked ye, didn't he ? " " Yes, he did," says I "right here it was." "Very good," says he " he used his ivory leg, didn't he ? " " Yes, he did," says I. " WeU, then," says he, " wise Stubb, what have you to complain of ? Didn't he kick with right goodwill ? it wasn't a common pitch-pine leg he kicked with, was it ? No, you were kicked by a great man, and with a beautiful ivory leg, Stubb. It 's an honour ; I consider it an honour. Listen, wise Stubb. In old England the greatest lords think it great glory to be slapped by a queen, and made garter-knights of ; but, be your boast, Stubb, that ye were kicked by old Ahab, QUEEN MAB 163 and made a wise man of. Remember what I say ; be kicked by him ; account his kicks honours ; and on no account kick back ; for you can't help yourself, wise Stubb. Don't you see that pyramid ? " With that, he all of a sudden seemed somehow, in some queer fashion, to swim off into the air. I snored ; rolled over ; and there I was in my hammock ! Now, what do you think of that dream, Flask ? ' 4 1 don't know ; it seems a sort of foolish to me, though.' 4 Maybe ; maybe. But it 's made a wise man of me, Flask. D' ye see Ahab standing there, sideways looking over the stern ? Well, the best thing you can do, Flask, is to let that old man alone ; never speak to him, whatever he says. Halloa ! What 's that he shouts ? Hark ! ' ' Mast-head, there ! Look sharp, all of ye ! There are whales hereabouts ! If ye see a white one, split your lungs for him ! ' ' What do you think of that now, Flask ? ain't there a small drop of something queer about that, eh ? A white whale did ye mark that, man ? Look ye there 's something special in the wind. Stand by for it, Flask. Ahab has that that 's bloody on his mind. But, mum ; he comes this way.' CHAPTER XXXII CETOLOGY ALREADY we are boldly launched upon the deep ; but soon we shall be lost in its unshored, harbourless immen- sities. Ere that come to pass ; ere the Pequod'a weedy hull rolls side by side with the barnacled hulls of the leviathan ; at the outset it is but well to attend to a matter almost indispensable to a thorough appreciative understanding of the more special leviathanic revelations and allusions of all sorts which are to follow. It is some systematised exhibition of the whale in his broad genera, that I would now fain put before you. Yet is it no easy task. The classification of the constituents of a chaos, nothing less is here essayed. Listen to what the best and latest authorities have laid down. ' No branch of Zoology is so much involved as that which is entitled Cetology,' says Captain Scoresby, A.D. 1820. ' It is not my intention, were it in my power, to enter into the inquiry as to the true method of dividing the cetacea into groups and families. * * * Utter confusion exists among the historians of this animal ' (Sperm whale), says Surgeon Beale, A.D. 1839. ' Unfitness to pursue our research in the unfathomable waters.' ' Impenetrable veil covering our knowledge of the cetacea.' ' A field strewn with thorns.' ' All these incomplete indications but serve to torture us naturalists.' Thus speak of the whale, the great Cuvier, and John Hunter, and Lesson, those lights of zoology and anatomy. Nevertheless, though of real knowledge there be little, 164 CETOLOGY 165 yet of books there are a plenty ; and so in some small degree, with Cetology, or the science of whales. Many are the men, small and great, old and new, landsmen and sea- men, who have at large or in little, written of the whale. Run over a few : The Authors of the Bible ; Aristotle ; Pliny ; Aldrovandi ; Sir Thomas Browne ; Gesner ; Ray ; Linnaeus ; Rondeletius ; Willoughby ; Green ; Artedi ; Sibbald ; Brisson ; Marten ; Lacepede ; Bonne- terre ; Desmarest ; Baron Cuvier ; Frederick Cuvier ; John Hunter ; Owen ; Scoresby ; Beale ; Bennett ; J. Ross Browne ; the Author of Miriam Coffin ; Olmstead ; and the Rev. T. Cheever. But to what ultimate general- ising purpose all these have written, the above-cited extracts will show. Of the names in this list of whale authors, only those following Owen ever saw living whales ; and but one of them was a real professional harpooneer and whaleman. I mean Captain Scoresby. On the separate subject of the Greenland or Right whale, he is the best existing authority. But Scoresby knew nothing and says nothing of the great Sperm whale, compared with which the Green- land whale is almost unworthy mentioning. And here be it said, that the Greenland whale is an usurper upon the throne of the seas. He is not even by any means the largest of the whales. Yet, owing to the long priority of his claims, and the profound ignorance which, till some seventy years back, invested the then fabulous or utterly unknown Sperm whale, and which ignorance to this present day still reigns in all but some few scientific retreats and whale -ports ; this usurpation has been every way complete. Reference to nearly all the leviathanic allusions in the great poets of past days, will satisfy you that the Greenland whale, without one rival, was to them the monarch of the seas. But the time has at last come for a new proclamation. This is Charing Cross ; hear ye ! 166 MOBY-DICK good people all, the Greenland whale is deposed, the great Sperm whale now reigneth ! There are only two books in being which at all pretend to put the living Sperm whale before you, and at the same time, in the remotest degree succeed in the attempt. Those books are Beale's and Bennett's ; both in their time surgeons to the English South -Sea whale -ships, and both exact and reliable men. The original matter touching the Sperm whale to be found in their volumes is necessarily small ; but so far as it goes, it is of excellent quality, though mostly confined to scientific description. As yet, however, the Sperm whale, scientific or poetic, lives not complete in any literature. Far above all other hunted whales, his is an unwritten life. Now the various species of whales need some sort of popular comprehensive classification, if only an easy outline one for the present, hereafter to be filled in all its departments by subsequent labourers. As no better man advances to take this matter in hand, I hereupon offer my own poor endeavours. I promise nothing complete ; because any human thing supposed to be complete, must for that very reason infallibly be faulty. I shall not pretend to a minute anatomical description of the various species, or in this place at least to much of any description. My object here is simply to project the draught of a systematisation of Cetology. I am the architect, not the builder. But it is a ponderous task ; no ordinary letter-sorter in the Post Office is equal to it. To grope down into the bottom of the sea after them ; to have one's hands among the unspeakable foundations, ribs, and very pelvis of the world ; this is a fearful thing. What am I that I should essay to hook the nose of this leviathan ! The awful tauntings in Job might well appal me. ' Will he (the leviathan) make a covenant with thee ? Behold the CETOLOGY 167 hope of him is vain ! ' But I have swam through libraries and sailed through oceans ; I have had to do with whales with these visible hands ; I am in earnest ; and I will try. There are some preliminaries to settle. First : The uncertain, unsettled condition of this science of Cetology is in the very vestibule attested by the fact, that in some quarters it still remains a moot point whether a whale be a fish. In his System of Nature, A.D. 1776, Linnaeus declares, ' I hereby separate the whales from the fish. 5 But of my own knowledge, I know that down to the year 1850, sharks and shad, ale wives and herring, against Linnaeus 's express edict, were still found dividing the possession of the same seas with the leviathan. The grounds upon which Linnaeus would fain have banished the whales from the waters, he states as follows : ' On account of their warm bilocular heart, their lungs, their movable eyelids, their hollow ears, penem intrantem feminam mammis lactantem,' and finally, ' ex lege naturae jure meritoque.' I submitted all this to my friends Simeon Macey and Charley Coffin, of Nantucket, both messmates of mine in a certain voyage, and they united in the opinion that the reasons set forth were altogether insufficient . Charley profanely hinted they were humbug . Be it known that, waiving all argument, I take the good old-fashioned ground that the whale is a fish, and call upon holy Jonah to back me. This fundamental thing settled, the next point is, in what internal respect does the whale differ from other fish. Above, Linnaeus has given you those items. But in brief, they are those : lungs and warm blood ; whereas, all other fish are lung- less and cold-blooded. Next : how shall we define the whale, by his obvious externals, so as conspicuously to label him for all time to come ? To be short, then, a whale is a spouting fish with a horizontal tail. There you have him. However con- 168 MOBY-DICK traded, that definition is the result of expanded medita- tion. A walrus spouts much like a whale, but the walrus is not a fish, because he is amphibious. But the last term of the definition is still more cogent, as coupled with the first. Almost any one must have noticed that all the fish familiar to landsmen have not a flat, but a vertical, or up-and-down tail. Whereas, among spouting fish the tail, though it may be similarly shaped, invariably assumes a horizontal position. By the above definition of what a whale is, I do by no means exclude from the leviathanic brotherhood any sea- creature hitherto identified with the whale by the best- informed Nantucketers ; nor, on the other hand, link with it any fish hitherto authoritatively regarded as alien. 1 Hence, all the smaller, spouting, and horizontal-tailed fish must be included in this ground-plan of Cetology. Now, then, come the grand divisions of the entire whale host. First : According to magnitude I divide the whales into three primary BOOKS (subdivisible into CHAPTERS), and these shall comprehend them all, both small and large. I. The FOLIO WHALE ; II. the OCTAVO WHALE ; III. the DUODECIMO WHALE. As the type of the FOLIO I present the Sperm Whale ; of the OCTAVO, the Grampus ; of the DUODECIMO, the Porpoise. FOLIOS. Among these I here include the following chapters : I. the Sperm Whale ; II. the Right Whale ; III. the Fin-lack Whale ; IV. the Hump-backed Whale \ V. the Razor-back Whale ; VI. the Sulphur-bottom Whale. BOOK I. (Folio), CHAPTER I. (Sperm Whale). This 1 I am aware that down to the present time, the fish styled Lamatins and Dugongs (Pig-fish and Sow-fish of the Coffins of Nantucket) are included by many naturalists among the whales. But as these pig-fish are a nosy, contemptible set, mostly lurking in the mouths of rivers, and feeding on wet hay, and especially as they do not spout, I deny their credentials as whales ; and have presented them with their passports to quit the Kingdom of Cetology. CETOLOGY 169 whale, among the English of old vaguely known as the Trumpa whale, and the Physeter whale, and the Anvil- headed whale, is the present Cachalot of the French, and the Pottsfisch of the Germans, and the Macrocephalus of the Long Words. He is, without doubt, the largest inhabitant of the globe ; the most formidable of all whales to encounter ; the most majestic in aspect ; and lastly, by far the most valuable in commerce ; he being the only creature from which that valuable substance, spermaceti, is obtained. All his peculiarities will, in many other places, be enlarged upon. It is chiefly with his name that I now have to do. Philologically con- sidered, it is absurd. Some centuries ago, when the Sperm whale was almost wholly unknown in his own proper individuality, and when his oil was only accident- ally obtained from the stranded fish ; in those days spermaceti, it would seem, was popularly supposed to be derived from a creature identical with the one then known in England as the Greenland or Right whale. It was the idea also, that this same spermaceti was that quicken- ing humour of the Greenland whale which the first syllable of the word literally expresses. In those times, also, spermaceti was exceedingly scarce, not being used for light, but only as an ointment and medicament. It was only to be had from the druggists as you nowadays buy an ounce of rhubarb. When, as I opine, in the course of time, the true nature of spermaceti became known, its original name was still retained by the dealers ; no doubt to enhance its value by a notion so strangely significant of its scarcity. And so the appellation must at last have come to be bestowed upon the whale from which this spermaceti was really derived. BOOK I. (Folio), CHAPTER II. (Right Whale). In one respect this is the most venerable of the leviathans, being the one first regularly hunted by man. It yields the 170 MOBY-DICK article commonly known as whalebone or baleen ; and the oil specially known as ' whale oil,' an inferior article in commerce. Among the fishermen, he is indiscrimin- ately designated by all the following titles : The Whale ; the Greenland Whale ; the Black Whale ; the Great Whale ; the True Whale ; the Right Whale. There is a deal of obscurity concerning the identity of the species thus multitudinously baptized. What then is the whale, which I include in the second species of my Folios ? It is the Great Mysticetus of the English naturalists ; the Greenland Whale of the English whalemen ; the Baleine Ordinaire of the French whalemen ; the Growlands Wal- fisch of the Swedes. It is the whale which for more than two centuries past has been hunted by the Dutch and English in the Arctic seas ; it is the whale which the American fishermen have long pursued in the Indian Ocean, on the Brazil Banks, on the Nor '-West Coast, and various other parts of the world, designated by them Right Whale Cruising-Grounds. Some pretend to see a difference between the Greenland whale of the English and the Right whale of the Ameri- cans. But they precisely agree in all their grand features ; nor has there yet been presented a single determinate fact upon which to ground a radical distinction. It is by endless subdivisions based upon the most inconclusive differences, that some departments of natural history become so repellingly intricate. The Right whale will be elsewhere treated of at some length, with reference to elucidating the Sperm whale. BOOK I. (Folio), CHAPTER III. (Fin-back). Under this head I reckon a monster which, by the various names of Fin-back, Tall-spout, and Long-John, has been seen almost in every sea and is commonly the whale whose distant jet is so often descried by passengers crossing the Atlantic, in the New York packet -tracks. In the length CETOLOGY 171 he attains, and in his baleen, the Fin-back resembles the Right whale, but is of a less portly girth, and a lighter colour, approaching to olive. His great lips present a cable-like aspect, formed by the intertwisting, slanting folds of large wrinkles. His grand distinguishing feature, the fin, from which he derives his name, is often a con- spicuous object. This fin is some three or four feet long, growing vertically from the hinder part of the back, of an angular shape, and with a very sharp-pointed end. Even if not the slightest other part of the creature be visible, this isolated fin will, at times, be seen plainly projecting from the surface. When the sea is moderately calm, and slightly marked with spherical ripples, and this gnomon-like fin stands up and casts shadows upon the wrinkled surface, it may well be supposed that the watery circle surrounding it somewhat resembles a dial, with its style and wavy hour-lines graved on it. On that Ahaz- dial the shadow often goes back. The Fin-back is not gregarious. He seems a whale-hater, as some men are man-haters. Very shy ; always going solitary ; unex- pectedly rising to the surface in the remotest and most sullen waters ; his straight and single lofty jet rising like a tall misanthropic spear upon a barren plain ; gifted with such wondrous power and velocity in swimming, as to defy all present pursuit from man ; this leviathan seems the banished and unconquerable Cain of his race, bearing for his mark that style upon his back. From having the baleen in his mouth, the Fin-back is sometimes included with the Right whale, among a theoretic species denomin- ated Whalebone whales, that is, whales with baleen. Of these so-called Whalebone whales, there would seem to be several varieties, most of which, however, are little known. Broad-nosed whales and Beaked whales ; Pike -headed whales ; Bunched whales ; Under- jawed whales and Rostrated whales, are the fishermen's names for a few sorts. 172 MOBY-DICK In connection with this appellative of ' Whalebone whales/ it is of great importance to mention, that how- ever such a nomenclature may be convenient in facilitat- ing allusions to some kind of whales, yet it is in vain to attempt a clear classification of the leviathan, founded upon either his baleen, or hump, or fin, or teeth ; not- withstanding that those marked parts or features very obviously seem better adapted to afford the basis for a regular system of Cetology than any other detached bodily distinctions, which the whale, in his kinds, presents. How then ? The baleen, hump, back-fin, and teeth ; these are things whose peculiarities are indiscriminately dispersed among all sorts of whales, without any regard to what may be the nature of their structure in other and more essential particulars. Thus, the Sperm whale and the Hump-backed whale, each has a hump ; but there the similitude ceases. Then, this same Hump-backed whale and the Greenland whale, each of these has baleen ; but there again the similitude ceases. And it is just the same with the other parts above mentioned. In various sorts of whales, they form such irregular combinations ; or, in the case of any one of them detached, such an irregular isolation ; as utterly to defy all general methodis- ation formed upon such a basis. On this rock every one of the whale -naturalists has split. But it may possibly be conceived that, in the internal parts of the whale, in his anatomy there, at least, we shall be able to hit the right classification. Nay : what thing, for example, is there in the Greenland whale's anatomy more striking than his baleen ? Yet we have seen that by his baleen it is impossible correctly to classify the Greenland whale. And if you descend into the bowels of the various leviathans, why there you will not find distinctions a fiftieth part as available to the systematiser as those external ones already enumerated. What then CETOLOGY 173 remains ? nothing but to take hold of the whales bodily, in their entire liberal volume, and boldly sort them that way. And this is the Bibliographical system here adopted ; and it is the only one that can possibly succeed, for it alone is practicable. To proceed. BOOK I. (Folio), CHAPTER IV. (Hump-back). This whale is often seen on the northern American coast. He has been frequently captured there, and towed into harbour. He has a great pack on him like a peddler ; or you might call him the Elephant and Castle whale. At any rate, the popular name for him does not sufficiently distinguish him, since the Sperm whale also has a hump, though a smaller one. His oil is not very valuable. He has baleen. He is the most gamesome and light-hearted of all the whales, making more gay foam and white water generally than any other of them. BOOK I. (Folio), CHAPTER V. (Razor-back). Of this whale little is known but his name. I have seen him at a distance off Cape Horn. Of a retiring nature, he eludes both hunters and philosophers. Though no coward, he has never yet shown any part of him but his back, which rises in a long sharp ridge. Let him go. I know little more of him, nor does anybody else. BOOK I. (Folio), CHAPTER VI. (Sulphur-bottom). Another retiring gentleman, with a brimstone belly, doubtless got by scraping along the Tartarian tiles in some of his profounder divings. He is seldom seen ; at least I have never seen him except in the remoter Southern seas, and then always at too great a distance to study his countenance. He is never chased ; he would run away with rope -walks of line. Prodigies are told of him. Adieu, Sulphur-bottom ! I can say nothing more that is true of ye, nor can the oldest Nantucketer. Thus ends BOOK I. (Folio), and now begins BOOK II, (Octavo). 174 MOBY-DICK OCTAVOS. 1 These embrace the whales of middling magnitude, among which at present may be numbered : I. the Grampus ; II. the Black Fish ; III. the Narwhale ; IV. the Killer ; V. the Thrasher. BOOK II. (Octavo), CHAPTER I. (Grampus). Though this fish, whose loud sonorous breathing, or rather blowing, has furnished a proverb to landsmen, is so well known a denizen of the deep, yet is he not popularly classed among whales. But possessing all the grand distinctive features of the leviathan, most naturalists have recog- nised him for one. He is of moderate octavo size, varying from fifteen to twenty-five feet in length, and of corre- sponding dimensions round the waist. He swims in herds ; he is never regularly hunted, though his oil is considerable in quantity, and pretty good for light. By some fishermen his approach is regarded as premonitory of the advance of the great Sperm whale. BOOK II. (Octavo), CHAPTER II. (Black Fish). I give the popular fishermen's names for all these fish, for gener- ally they are the best. Where any name happens to be vague or inexpressive, I shall say so, and suggest another. I do so now, touching the Black Fish, so called, because blackness is the rule among almost all whales. So, call him the Hyena whale, if you please. His voracity is well known, and from the circumstance that the inner angles of his lips are curved upward, he carries an everlasting Mephistophelean grin on his face. This whale averages some sixteen or eighteen feet in length. He is found in almost all latitudes. He has a peculiar way of showing his dorsal hooked fin in swimming, which looks something like a Roman nose. When not more profitably employed, 1 Why this book of whales is not denominated the Quarto is very plain. Because, while the whales of this order, though smaller than those of the former order, nevertheless retain a proportionate likeness to them in figure, yet the bookbinder's Quarto volume in its diminished form does not preserve the shape of the Folio volume, but the Octavo volume does. CETOLOGY 175 the Sperm-whale hunters sometimes capture the Hyena whale, to keep up the supply of cheap oil for domestic employment as some frugal housekeepers, in the absence of company, and quite alone by themselves, burn un- savoury tallow instead of odorous wax. Though their blubber is very thin, some of these whales will yield you upward of thirty gallons of oil. BOOK II. (Octavo), CHAPTER III. (Narwhale), that is, Nostril Whale. Another instance of a curiously named whale, so named I suppose from his peculiar horn being originally mistaken for a peaked nose. The creature is some sixteen feet in length, while its horn averages five feet, though some exceed ten, and even attain to fifteen feet. Strictly speaking, this horn is but a lengthened tusk, growing out from the jaw in a line a little depressed from the horizontal. But it is only found on the sinister side, which has an ill effect, giving its owner something analogous to the aspect of a clumsy left-handed man. What precise purpose this ivory horn or lance answers, it would be hard to say. It does not seem to be used like the blade of the sword-fish and bill-fish ; though some sailors tell me that the Narwhale employs it for a rake in turning over the bottom of the sea for food. Charley Coffin said it was used for an ice-piercer ; for the Nar- whale, rising to the surface of the Polar Sea, and finding it sheeted with ice, thrusts his horn up, and so breaks through. But you cannot prove either of these surmises to be correct. My own opinion is, that however this one- sided horn may really be used by the Narwhale however that may be it would certainly be very convenient to him for a folder in reading pamphlets. The Narwhale I have heard called the Tusked whale, the Horned whale, and the Unicorn whale. He is certainly a curious example of the Unicornism to be found in almost every kingdom of animated nature. From certain cloistered 176 MOBY-DICK old authors I have gathered that this same sea-unicorn's horn was in ancient days regarded as the great antidote against poison, and as such, preparations of it brought immense prices. It was also distilled to a volatile salts for fainting ladies, the same way that the horns of the male deer are manufactured into hartshorn. Originally it was in itself accounted an object of great curiosity. Black Letter tells me that Sir Martin Frobisher on his return from that voyage, when Queen Bess did gallantly wave her jewelled hand to him from a window of Green- wich Palace, as his bold ship sailed down the Thames ; ' when Sir Martin returned from that voyage,' saith Black Letter, ' on bended knees he presented to her highness a prodigious long horn of the Narwhale, which for a long period after hung in the castle at Windsor.' An Irish author avers that the Earl of Leicester, on bended knees, did likewise present to her highness another horn, per- taining to a land-beast of the unicorn nature. The Narwhale has a very picturesque, leopard-like look, being of a milk-white ground colour, dotted with round and oblong spots of black. His oil is very superior, clear and fine ; but there is little of it, and he is seldom hunted. He is mostly found in the circumpolar seas. BOOK II. (Octavo), CHAPTER IV. (Killer). Of this whale little is precisely known to the Nantucketer, and nothing at all to the professed naturalist. From what I have seen of him at a distance, I should say that he was about the bigness of a grampus. He is very savage a sort of Feegee fish. He sometimes takes the great Folio whale by the lip, and hangs there like a leech, till the mighty brute is worried to death. The Killer is never hunted. I never heard what sort of oil he has. Excep- tion might be taken to the name bestowed upon this whale, on the ground of its indistinctness. For we are all killers, on land and on sea ; Bonapartes and Sharks included. CETOLOGY 177 BOOK II. (Octavo), CHAPTER V. (Thrasher). This gentleman is famous for his tail, which he uses for a ferule in thrashing his foes. He mounts the Folio whale's back, and as he swims, he works his passage by flogging him ; as some schoolmasters get along in the world by a similar process. Still less is known of the Thrasher than of the Killer. Both are outlaws, even in the lawless seas. Thus ends BOOK II. (Octavo), and begins BOOK III. (Duodecimo). DUODECIMOS. These include the smaller whales: I. the Huzza Porpoise ; II. the Algerine Porpoise ; III. the Mealy-mouthed Porpoise. To those who have not chanced specially to study the subject, it may possibly seem strange, that fishes not commonly exceeding four or five feet should be marshalled among WHALES a word which, in the popular sense, always conveys an idea of hugeness. But the creatures set down above as Duodecimos are infallibly whales, by the terms of my definition of what a whale is i.e. a spouting fish, with a horizontal tail. BOOK III. (Duodecimo), CHAPTER I. (Huzza Porpoise). This is the common porpoise found almost all over the globe. The name is of my own bestowal ; for there are more than one sort of porpoises, and something must be done to distinguish them. I call him thus, because he always swims in hilarious shoals, which upon the broad sea keep tossing themselves to heaven like caps in a Fourth-of-July crowd. Their appearance is generally hailed with delight by the mariner. Full of fine spirits, they invariably come from the breezy billows to windward. They are the lads that always live before the wind. They are accounted a lucky omen. If you yourself can with- stand three cheers at beholding these vivacious fish, then heaven help ye ; the spirit of godly gamesomeness is not VOL. I. M 178 MOBY-DICK in ye. A well-fed, plump Huzza porpoise will yield you one good gallon of good oil. But the fine and delicate fluid extracted from his jaws is exceedingly valuable. It is in request among jewellers and watchmakers. Sailors put it on their hones. Porpoise meat is good eating, you know. It may never have occurred to you that a por- poise spouts. Indeed, his spout is so small that it is not very readily discernible. But the next time you have a chance, watch him ; and you will then see the great Sperm whale himself in miniature. BOOK III. (Duodecimo), CHAPTER II. (Algerine Por- poise). A pirate. Very savage. He is only found, I think, in the Pacific. He is somewhat larger than the Huzza porpoise, but much of the same general make. Provoke him, and he will buckle to a shark. I have lowered for him many times, but never yet saw him captured. BOOK III. (Duodecimo), CHAPTER III. (Mealy-mouthed Porpoise). The largest kind of porpoise ; and only found in the Pacific, so far as it is known. The only English name, by which he has hitherto been designated, ,is that of the fishers Right-whale porpoise, from the circumstance that he is chiefly found in the vicinity of that Folio. In shape, he differs in some degree from the Huzza porpoise, being of a less rotund and jolly girth ; indeed, he is of quite a neat and gentleman -like figure. He has no fins on his back (most other porpoises have), he has a lovely tail, and sentimental Indian eyes of a hazel hue. But his mealy-mouth spoils all. Though his entire back down to his side fins is of a deep sable, yet a boundary line, distinct as the mark in a ship's hull, called the ' bright waist/ that line streaks him from stem to stern, with two separate colours, black above and white below. The white comprises part of his head, and the whole of his mouth, which makes him look as if he had just escaped from a felonious visit to a meal -bag. CETOLOGY 179 A most mean and mealy aspect ! His oil is much like that of the common porpoise. ******* Beyond the DUODECIMO, this system does not proceed, inasmuch as the porpoise is the smallest of the whales. Above, you have all the leviathans of note. But there are a rabble of uncertain, fugitive, half-fabulous whales, which, as an American whaleman, I know by reputation, but not personally. I shall enumerate them by their forecastle appellations ; for possibly such a list may be valuable to future investigators, who may complete what I have here but begun. If any of the following whales shall hereafter be caught and marked, then he can readily be incorporated into this system, according to his Folio, Octavo, or Duodecimo magnitude : The Bottle-nose Whale ; the Junk Whale ; the Pudding-headed Whale ; the Cape Whale ; the Leading Whale ; the Cannon Whale ; the Scragg Whale ; the Coppered Whale ; the Elephant Whale ; the Iceberg Whale ; the Quog Whale ; the Blue Whale, etc. From Icelandic, Dutch, and old English authorities, there might be quoted other lists of uncertain whales, blessed with all manner of uncouth names. But I omit them as altogether obsolete ; and can hardly help suspecting them for mere sounds, full of leviathanism, but signifying nothing. Finally : It was stated at the outset, that this system would not be here, and at once, perfected. You cannot but plainly see that I have kept my word. But I now leave my cetological system standing thus unfinished, even as the great Cathedral of Cologne was left, with the crane still standing upon the top of the uncompleted tower. For small erections may be finished by their first archi- tects ; grand ones, true ones, ever leave the cope-stone to posterity. God keep me from ever completing anything. This whole book is but a draught nay, but the draught of a draught. Oh, Time, Strength, Cash, and Patience ! CHAPTER XXXIII THE SPECKSYNDER CONCERNING the officers of the whale-craft, this seems as good a place as any to set down a little domestic peculiarity on shipboard, arising from the existence of the harpooneer class of officers, a class unknown of course in any other marine than the whale-fleet. The large importance attached to the harpooneer J s vocation is evinced by the fact, that originally in the old Dutch Fishery, two centuries and more ago, the command of a whale -ship was not wholly lodged in the person now called the captain, but was divided between him and an officer called the Specksynder. Literally this word means Fat -Cutter ; usage, however, in time made it equivalent to Chief Harpooneer. In those days, the captain's authority was restricted to the navigation and general management of the vessel : while over the whale- hunting department and all its concerns, the Specksynder or Chief Harpooneer reigned supreme. In the British Greenland Fishery, under the corrupted title of Speck- sioneer, this old Dutch official is still retained, but his former dignity is sadly abridged. At present he ranks simply as senior Harpooneer ; and as such, is but one of the captain's more inferior subalterns. Nevertheless, as upon the good conduct of the harpooneers the success of a whaling voyage largely depends, and since in the Ameri- can Fishery he is not only an important officer in the boat, but under certain circumstances (night-watches on a whaling -ground) the command of the ship's deck is also 180 THE SPECKSYNDER 181 his ; therefore the grand political maxim of the sea demands, that he should nominally live apart from the men before the mast, and be in some way distinguished as their professional superior ; though always, by them, familiarly regarded as their social equal. Now, the grand distinction drawn between officer and man at sea is this the first lives aft, the last forward. Hence, in whale-ships and merchantmen alike, the mates have their quarters with the captain ; and so, too, in most of the American whalers the harpooneers are lodged in the after part of the ship. That is to say, they take their meals in the captain's cabin, and sleep in a place indirectly communicating with it. Though the long period of a Southern whaling voyage (by far the longest of all voyages now or ever made by man), the peculiar perils of it, and the community of interest prevailing among a company, all of whom, high or low, depend for their profits, not upon fixed wages, but upon their common luck, together with their common vigilance, intrepidity, and hard work ; though all these things do in some cases tend to beget a less rigorous discipline than in merchantmen generally ; yet, never mind how much like an old Mesopotamian family these whalemen may, in some primitive instances, live together ; for all that, the punctilious externals, at least, of the quarter-deck are seldom materially relaxed, and in no instance done away. Indeed, many are the Nantucket ships in which you will see the skipper parading his quarter-deck with an elated grandeur not surpassed in any military navy ; nay, extorting almost as much out- ward homage as if he wore the imperial purple, and not the shabbiest of pilot-cloth. And though of all men the moody captain of the Pequod was the least given to that sort of shallowest assumption ; and though the only homage he ever exacted was im- 182 MOBY-DICK plicit, instantaneous obedience ; though he required no man to remove the shoes from his feet ere stepping upon the quarter-deck ; and though there were times when, owing to peculiar circumstances connected with events hereafter to be detailed, he addressed them in unusual terms, whether of condescension or in terrorem, or other- wise ; yet even Captain Ahab was by no means unob- servant of the paramount forms and usages of the sea. Nor, perhaps, will it fail to be eventually perceived, that behind those forms and usages, as it were, he sometimes masked himself ; incidentally making use of them for other and more private ends than they were legitimately intended to subserve. That certain sultanism of his brain, which had otherwise in a good degree remained unmanifested ; through those forms that same sultanism /became incarnate in an irresistible dictatorship. For be a man's intellectual superiority what it will, it can never assume the practical, available supremacy over other men, without the aid of some sort of external arts and entrench- ments, always, in themselves, more or less paltry and base. This it is, that forever keeps God's true princes of the Empire from the world's hustings ; and leaves the highest honours that this air can give, to those men who become famous more through their infinite inferiority to the choice hidden handful of the Divine Inert, than through their undoubted superiority over the dead level of the mass. Such large virtue lurks in these small things when extreme political superstitions invest them, that in some royal instances even to idiot imbecility they have imparted potency. But when, as in the case of Nicholas the Czar, the ringed crown of geographical empire encircles an imperial brain ; then, the plebeian herds crouch abased before the tremendous centralisation. Nor will the tragic dramatist who would depict mortal indomitable - ness in its fullest sweep and direct swing, ever forget a THE SPECKS YNDER 183 hint, incidentally so important in his art, as the one now alluded to. But Ahab, my captain, still moves before me in all his Nantucket grimness and shagginess ; and in this episode touching emperors and kings, I must not conceal that I have only to do with a poor old whale-hunter like him ; and, therefore, all outward majestical trappings and housings are denied me. Oh, Ahab ! what shall be grand in thee, it must needs be plucked at from the skies, and dived for in the deep, and featured in the unbodied air ! CHAPTER XXXIV THE CABIN-TABLE IT is noon ; and Dough-Boy, the steward, thrusting his pale loaf-of-bread face from the cabin-scuttle, announces dinner to his lord and master ; who, sitting in the lee quarter-boat, has just been taking an observation of the sun ; and is now mutely reckoning the latitude on the smooth, medallion-shaped tablet, reserved for that daily purpose on the upper part of his ivory leg. From his complete inattention to the tidings, you would think that moody Ahab had not heard his menial. But presently, catching hold of the mizen shrouds, he swings himself to the deck, and in an even, unexhilarated voice, saying, 'Dinner, Mr. Starbuck,' disappears into the .cabin. When the last echo of his sultan's step has died away, and Starbuck, the first Emir, has every reason to suppose that he is seated, then Starbuck rouses from his quietude, takes a few turns along the planks, and, after a grave peep into the binnacle, says, with some touch of pleasantness, ' Dinner, Mr. Stubb,' and descends the scuttle. The second Emir lounges about the rigging a while, and then slightly shaking the main-brace, to see whether it be all right with that important rope, he likewise takes up the old burden, and with a rapid * Dinner, Mr. Flask,' follows after his predecessors. But the third Emir, now seeing himself all alone on the quarter-deck, seems to feel relieved from some curious restraint ; for, tipping all sorts of knowing winks in all sorts of directions, and kicking off his shoes, he strikes 184 THE CABIN-TABLE 185 into a sharp but noiseless squall of a hornpipe right over the Grand Turk's head ; and then, by a dexterous sleight, pitching his cap up into the mizen-top for a shelf, he goes down rollicking, so far at least as he remains visible from the deck, reversing all other processions by bringing up the rear with music. But ere stepping into the cabin doorway below, he pauses, ships a new face altogether, and then, independent, hilarious little Flask enters King Ahab's presence, in the character of Abjectus, or the Slave. It is not the least among the strange things bred by the intense artificialness of sea-usages, that while in the open air of the deck some officers will, upon provocation, bear themselves boldly and defyingly enough toward their com- mander ; yet, ten to one, let those very officers the next moment go down to their customary dinner in that same commander's cabin, and straightway their inoffensive, not to say deprecatory and humble air toward him, as he sits at the head of the table ; this is marvellous, some- times most comical. Wherefore this difference ? A problem ? Perhaps not. To have been Belshazzar, King of Babylon ; and to have been Belshazzar, not haughtily but courteously, therein certainly must have been some touch of mundane grandeur. But he who in the rightly regal and intelligent spirit presides over his own private dinner-table of invited guests, that man's unchallenged power and dominion of individual influ- ence for the time ; that man's royalty of state transcends Belshazzar 's, for Belshazzar was not the greatest. Who has but once dined his friends, has tasted what it is to be Caesar. It is a witchery of social czarship which there is no withstanding. Now, if to this consideration you superadd the official supremacy of a shipmaster, then, by inference, you will derive the cause of that peculiarity of sea-life just mentioned. 186 MOBY-DICK Over his ivory-inlaid table, Ahab presided like a mute, maned sea-lion on the white coral beach, surrounded by his warlike but still deferential cubs. In his own proper turn, each officer waited to be served. They were as little children before Ahab ; and yet, in Ahab, there seemed not to lurk the smallest social arrogance. With one mind, their intent eyes all fastened upon the old man's knife, as he carved the chief dish before him. I do not suppose that for the world they would have profaned that moment with the slightest observation, even upon so neutral a topic as the weather. No ! And when reaching out his knife and fork, between which the slice of beef was locked, Ahab thereby motioned Starbuck's plate toward him, the mate received his meat as though receiving alms ; and cut it tenderly ; and a little started if, perchance, the knife grazed against the plate ; and chewed it noiselessly ; and swallowed it, not without circumspection. For, like the Coronation banquet at Frankfort, where the German Emperor profoundly dines with the seven Imperial Electors, so these cabin meals were somehow solemn meals, eaten in awful silence ; and yet at table old Ahab forbade not conversation ; only he himself was dumb. What a relief it was to choking Stubb, when a rat made a sudden racket in the hold below. And poor little Flask, he was the youngest son, and little boy of this weary family party. His were the shin-bones of the saline beef ; his would have been the drumsticks. For Flask to have presumed to help himself, this must have seemed to him tantamount to larceny in the first degree. Had he helped himself at that table, doubtless, never more would he have been able to hold his head up in this honest world ; nevertheless, strange to say, Ahab never forbade him. And had Flask helped himself, the chances were Ahab had never so much as noticed it. Least of all, did Flask presume to help himself to butter. THE CABIN-TABLE 187 Whether he thought the owners of the ship denied it to him, on account of its clotting his clear, sunny com- plexion ; or whether he deemed that, on so long a voyage in such marketless waters, butter was at a premium, and therefore was not for him, a subaltern ; however it was, Flask, alas ! was a butterless man ! Another thing. Flask was the last person down at the dinner, and Flask is the first man up. Consider ! For hereby Flask's dinner was badly jammed in point of time. Starbuck and Stubb both had the start of him ; and yet they also have the privilege of lounging in the rear. If Stubb even, who is but a peg higher than Flask, happens to have but a small appetite, and soon shows symptoms of concluding his repast, then Flask must bestir himself, he will not get more than three mouthfuls that day ; for it is against holy usage for Stubb to precede Flask to the deck. Therefore it was that Flask once admitted in private, that ever since he had arisen to the dignity of an officer, from that moment he had never known what it was to be otherwise than hungry, more or less. For what he ate did not so much relieve his hunger, as keep it immortal hi him. Peace and satisfaction, thought Flask, have forever departed from my stomach. I am an officer ; but, how I wish I could fist a bit of old- fashioned beef in the forecastle, as I used to when I was before the mast. There 's the fruits of promotion now ; there 's the vanity of glory : there 's the insanity of life ! Besides, if it were so that any mere sailor of the Pequod had a grudge against Flask in Flask's official capacity, all that sailor had to do, in order to obtain ample vengeance, was to go aft at dinner-time, and get a peep at Flask through the cabin skylight, sitting silly and dumfoundered before awful Ahab. Now, Ahab and his three mates formed what may be called the first table in the Pequod' s cabin. After their 188 MOBY-DICK departure, taking place in inverted order to their arrival, the canvas cloth was cleared, or rather was restored to some hurried order by the pallid steward. And then the three harpooneers were bidden to the feast, they being its residuary legatees. They made a sort of temporary servants' hall of the high and mighty cabin. In strange contrast to the hardly tolerable constraint and nameless invisible domineerings of the captain's table, was the entire care -free licence and ease, the almost frantic democracy of those inferior fellows the harpooneers. While their masters, the mates, seemed afraid of the sound of the hinges of their own jaws, the harpooneers chewed their food with such a relish that there was a report to it. They dined like lords ; they filled their bellies like Indian ships all day loading with spices. Such portentous appetites had Queequeg and Tashtego, that to fill out the vacancies made by the previous repast, often the pale Dough-Boy was fain to bring on a great baron of salt-junk, seemingly quarried out of the solid ox. And if he were not lively about it, if he did not go with a nimble hop-skip-and-jump, then Tashtego had an ungeiitlemanly way of accelerating him by darting a fork at his back, harpoon- wise. And once Daggoo, seized with a sudden humour, assisted Dough-Boy's memory by snatching him up bodily, and thrusting his head into a great empty wooden trencher, while Tashtego, knife in hand, began laying out the circle preliminary to scalping him. He was naturally a very nervous, shuddering sort of little fellow, this broad-faced steward ; the progeny of a bankrupt baker and a hospital nurse. And what with the standing spectacle of the black terrific Ahab, and the periodical tumultuous visitations of these three savages, Dough-Boy's whole life was one continual lip- quiver. Commonly, after seeing the harpooneers fur- nished with all things they demanded, he would escape THE CABIN-TABLE 189 from their clutches into his little pantry adjoining, and fearfully peep out at them through the blinds of its door, till all was over. It was a sight to see Queequeg seated over against Tashtego, opposing his filed teeth to the Indian's : cross- wise to them, Daggoo seated on the floor, for a bench would have brought his hearse-plumed head to the low carlines ; at every motion of his colossal limbs, making the low cabin framework to shake, as when an African elephant goes passenger in a ship. But for all this, the great negro was wonderfully abstemious, not to say dainty. It seemed hardly possible that by such comparatively small mouthfuls he could keep up the vitality diffused through so broad, baronial, and superb a person. But, doubtless, this noble savage fed strong and drank deep of the abounding element of air ; and through his dilated nostrils snuffed in the sublime life of the worlds. Not by beef or by bread are giants made or nourished. But Queequeg, he had a mortal, barbaric smack of the lip in eating an ugly sound enough so much so, that the trembling Dough-Boy almost looked to see whether any marks of teeth lurked in his own lean arms. And when he would hear Tashtego singing out for him to produce himself, that his bones might be picked, the simple -witted steward all but shattered the crockery hanging round him in the pantry, by his sudden fits of the palsy. Nor did the whetstone which the harpooneers carried in their pockets, for their lances and other weapons ; and with which whetstones, at dinner, they would ostentatiously sharpen their knives ; that grating sound did not at all tend to tranquillise poor Dough-Boy. How could he forget that in his Island days, Queequeg, for one, must certainly have been guilty of some murderous, convivial indiscretions. Alas ! Dough-Boy ! hard fares the white waiter who waits upon cannibals. Not a napkin should 190 MOBY-DICK he carry on his arm, but a buckler. In good time, though, to his great delight, the three salt-sea warriors would rise and depart ; to his credulous, fable-mongering ears, all their martial bones jingling in them at every step, like Moorish scimitars in scabbards. But, though these barbarians dined in the cabin, and nominally lived there ; still, being anything but seden- tary in their habits, they were scarcely ever in it except at meal-times, and just before sleeping-time, when they passed through it to their own peculiar quarters. In this one matter, Ahab seemed no exception to most American whale-captains, who, as a set, rather incline to the opinion that by rights the ship's cabin belongs to them ; and that it is by courtesy alone that anybody else is, at any time, permitted there. So that, in real truth, the mates and harpooneers of the Pequod might more properly be said to have lived out of the cabin than in it. For when they did enter it, it was something as a street-door enters a house ; turning inward for a moment, only to be turned out the next ; and, as a permanent thing, residing in the open air. Nor did they lose much hereby ; in the cabin was no companionship ; socially, Ahab was inaccessible. Though nominally included in the census of Christendom, he was still an alien to it. He lived in the world, as the last of the grizzly bears lived in settled Missouri. And as when spring and summer had departed, that wild Logan of the woods, burying himself in the hollow of a tree, lived out the winter there, sucking his own paws ; so, in his inclement, howling old age, Ahab's soul, shut up in the caved trunk of his body, there fed upon the sullen paws of its gloom ! CHAPTER XXXV THE MAST-HEAD IT was during the more pleasant weather, that in due rotation with the other seamen my first mast-head came round. In most American whalemen the mast-heads are manned almost simultaneously with the vessel's leaving her port - r even though she may have fifteen thousand miles, and more, to sail ere reaching her proper cruising- ground. And if, after a three, four, or five years' voyage she is drawing nigh home with anything empty in her say, an empty vial even then her mast-heads are kept manned to the last ; and not till her skysail-poles sail in among the spires of the port, does she altogether relin- quish the hope of capturing one whale more. Now, as the business of standing mast-heads, ashore or afloat, is a very ancient and interesting one, let us in some measure expatiate here. I take it, that the earliest standers of mast-heads were the old Egyptians ; because, in all my researches, I find none prior to them. For though their progenitors, the builders of Babel, must doubtless, by their tower, have intended to rear the loftiest mast-head in all Asia, or Africa either ; yet (ere the final truck was put to it) as that great stone mast of theirs may be said to have gone by the board, in the dread gale of God's wrath ; therefore, we cannot give these Babel builders priority over the Egyptians. And that the Egyptians were a nation of mast-head standers is an assertion based upon the general belief among archseo- 191 192 MOBY-DICK legists, that the first pyramids were founded for astro- nomical purposes : a theory singularly supported by the peculiar stair-like formation of all four sides of those edifices ; whereby, with prodigious long upliftings of their legs, those old astronomers were wont to mount to the apex, and sing out for new stars ; even as the look-outs of a modern ship sing out for a sail, or a whale just bearing in sight. In Saint Stylites, the famous Christian hermit of old times, who built him a lofty stone pillar in the desert and spent the whole latter portion of his life on its summit, hoisting his food from the ground with a tackle ; in him we have a remarkable instance of a dauntless stander of mast-heads ; who was not to be driven from his place by fogs or frosts, rain, hail, or sleet ; but vali- antly facing everything out to the last, literally died at his post. Of modern standers of mast-heads we have but a lifeless set ; mere stone, iron, and bronze men ; who, though well capable of facing out a stiff gale, are still entirely incompetent to the business of singing out upon discovering any strange sight. There is Napoleon ; who, upon the top of the column of Vendome, stands with arms folded, some one hundred and fifty feet in the air ; care- less, now, who rules the decks below ; whether Louis- Philippe, Louis Blanc, or Louis the Devil. Great Washington, too, stands high aloft on his towering main- mast in Baltimore, and like one of Hercules' pillars, his column marks that point of human grandeur beyond which few mortals will go. Admiral Nelson, also, on a capstan of gun-metal, stands his mast-head in Trafalgar Square ; and ever when most obscured by that London smoke, token is yet given that a hidden hero is there ; for where there is smoke, must be fire. But neither great Washing- ton, nor Napoleon, nor Nelson, will answer a single hail from below, however madly invoked to befriend by their counsels the distracted decks upon which they gaze ; THE MAST-HEAD 193 however it' may be surmised, that their spirits penetrate through the thick haze of the future, and descry what shoals and what rocks must be shunned. It may seem unwarrantable to couple in any respect the mast-head standers of the land with those of the sea ; but that in truth it is not so, is plainly evinced by an item for which Obed Macy, the sole historian of Nantucket, stands accountable. The worthy Obed tells us, that in the early times of the whale-fishery, ere ships were regu- larly launched in pursuit of the game, the people of that island erected lofty spars along the sea-coast, to which the look-outs ascended by means of nailed cleats, some- thing as fowls go upstairs in a hen-house. A few years ago this same plan was adopted by the Bay whalemen of New Zealand, who, upon descrying the game, gave notice to the ready-manned boats nigh the beach. But this custom has now become obsolete ; turn we then to the one proper mast-head, that of a whale-ship at sea. The three mast-heads are kept manned from sunrise to sunset ; the seamen taking their regular turns (as at the helm), and relieving each other every two hours. In the serene weather of the Tropics it is exceedingly pleasant the mast- head ; nay, to a dreamy meditative man it is delightful. There you stand, a hundred feet above the silent decks, ; striding along the deep, as if the masts were gigantic ; stilts, while beneath you and between your legs, as it were, swim the hugest monsters of the sea, even as ships once sailed between the boots of the famous Colossus at old Rhodes. There you stand, lost in the infinite series of the sea, with nothing ruffled but the waves. The tranced ship indolently rolls ; the drowsy trade winds ;blow ; everything resolves you into languor. For the most part, in this tropic whaling life, a sublime unevent- Mness invests you ; you hear no news ; read no gazettes ; ;)xtras with startling accounts of commonplaces never VOL. i. N 194 MOBY-DICK delude you into unnecessary excitements ; you hear of no domestic afflictions ; bankrupt securities ; fall of stocks ; are never troubled with the thought of what you shall have for dinner for all your meals for three years and more are snugly stowed in casks, and your bill of fare is immutable. In one of those Southern whalemen, on a long three or four years' voyage, as often happens, the sum of the various hours you spend at the mast-head would amount to several entire months. And it is much to be deplored that the place to which you devote so considerable a portion of the whole term of your natural life, should be so sadly destitute of anything approaching to a cosy inhabitive- ness, or adapted to breed a comfortable localness of feel- ing, such as pertains to a bed, a hammock, a hearse, a sentry-box, a pulpit, a coach, or any other of those small and snug contrivances in which men temporarily isolate themselves. Your most usual point of perch is the head of the t '-gallant-mast, where you stand upon two thin parallel sticks (almost peculiar to whalemen) called the t '-gallant-cross-trees. Here, tossed about by the sea, the beginner feels about as cosy as he would standing on a bull's horns. To be sure, in cold weather you may carry your house aloft with you, in the shape of a watch-coat ; but properly speaking the thickest watch-coat is no more of a house than the unclad body ; for as the soul is glued inside of its fleshly tabernacle, and cannot freely move about in it, nor even move out of it, without running great risk of perishing (like an ignorant pilgrim crossing the snowy Alps in winter) ; so a watch-coat is not so much of a house as it is a mere envelope, or additional skin encasing you. You cannot put a shelf or chest of drawers i in your body, and no more can you make a convenient closet of your watch-coat. Concerning all this, it is much to be deplored that the THE MAST-HEAD 195 mast-heads of a Southern whale -ship are unprovided with those enviable little tents or pulpits, called crow's- nests, in which the look-outs of a Greenland whaler are protected from the inclement weather of the frozen seas. In the fireside narrative of Captain Sleet, entitled A Voyage among the Icebergs, in quest of the Greenland Whale, and incidentally for the re-discovery of the Lost Icelandic Colonies of Old Greenland ; in this admirable volume, all standers of mast-heads are furnished with a charmingly circumstantial account of the then recently invented crow's-nest of the Glacier, which was the name of Captain Sleet's good craft. He called it the Sleet's crow's-nest, in honour of himself ; he being the original inventor and patentee, and free from all ridiculous false delicacy, and holding that if we call our own children after our own names (we fathers being the original inventors and patentees), so likewise should we denominate after our- selves any other apparatus we may beget. In shape, the Sleet's crow's-nest is something like a large tierce or pipe ; it is open above, however, where it is furnished with a movable side -screen to keep to windward of your head in a hard gale. Being fixed on the summit of the mast, you ascend into it through a little trap-hatch in the bottom. On the after side, or side next the stern of the ship, is a comfortable seat, with a locker underneath for umbrellas, comforters, and coats. In front is a leather rack, hi which to keep your speaking trumpet, pipe, telescope, and other nautical conveniences. When Captain Sleet in person stood his mast-head hi this crow's- nest of his, he tells us that he always had a rifle with him (also fixed in the rack), together with a powder-flask and shot, for the purpose of popping off the stray narwhales, or vagrant sea-unicorns infesting those waters ; for you cannot successfully shoot at them from the deck owing to the resistance of the water, but to shoot down upon them 196 MOBY-DICK is a very different thing. Now, it was plainly a labour of love for Captain Sleet to describe, as he does, all the little detailed conveniences of his crow's-nest ; but though he so enlarges upon many of these, and though he treats us to a very scientific account of his experiments in this crow's-nest, with a small compass he kept there for the purpose of counteracting the errors resulting from what is called the ' local attraction ' of all binnacle magnets ; an error ascribable to the horizontal vicinity of the iron in the ship's planks, and in the Glacier's case, perhaps, to there having been so many broken-down blacksmiths among her crew ; I say, that though the captain is very discreet and scientific here, yet, for all his learned ' bin- nacle deviations,' ' azimuth compass observations,' and ' approximate errors,' he knows very well, Captain Sleet, that he was not so much immersed in those profound magnetic meditations, as to fail being attracted occasion- ally toward that well-replenished little case-bottle, so nicely tucked in on one side of his crow's-nest, within easy reach of his hand. Though, upon the whole, I greatly admire and even love the brave, the honest, and learned captain ; yet I take it very ill of him that he should so utterly ignore that case-bottle, seeing what a faithful friend and comforter it must have been, while with mittened fingers and hooded head he was studying the mathematics aloft there in that bird's nest within three or four perches of the pole. But if we Southern whale -fishers are not so snugly housed aloft as Captain Sleet and his Greenland men were ; yet that disadvantage is greatly counterbalanced by the widely contrasting serenity of those seductive seas in which we South fishers mostly float. For one, I used to lounge up the rigging very leisurely, resting hi the top to have a chat with Queequeg, or anyone else off duty whom I might find there ; then ascending a littl THE MAST-HEAD 197 way further, and throwing a lazy leg over the topsail- yard, take a preliminary view of the watery pastures, and so at last mount to my ultimate destination. Let me make a clean breast of it here, and frankly admit that I kept but sorry guard. With the problem of the universe revolving in me, how could I being left completely to myself at such a thought-engendering alti- tude, how could I but lightly hold my obligations to observe all whale -ships' standing orders, ' Keep your weather-eye open, and sing out every time ' ? And let me in this place movingly admonish you, ye shipowners of Nantucket ! Beware of enlisting in your vigilant fisheries any lad with lean brow and hollow eye ; given to unseasonable meditativeness ; and who offers to ship with the Phsedon instead of Bowditch in his head. Beware of such an one, I say : your whales must be seen before they can be killed ; and this sunken-eyed young Platonist will tow you ten wakes round the world, and never make you one pint of sperm the richer. Nor are these monitions at all unneeded. For nowadays, the whale-fishery furnishes an asylum for many romantic, melancholy, and absent-minded young men, disgusted with the carking cares of earth, and seeking sentiment in tar and blubber. Childe Harold not unfrequently perches himself upon the mast-head of some luckless disappointed whale-ship, and in moody phrase ejaculates : 1 Roll on, thou deep and dark blue ocean, roll ! Ten thousand blubber-hunters sweep over thee in vain.' Very often do the captains of such ships take those absent-minded young philosophers to task, upbraiding them with not feeling sufficient ' interest ' in the voyage ; half -hinting that they are so hopelessly lost to all honour- able ambition, as that in their secret souls they would rather not see whales than otherwise. But all in vain ; 198 MOBY-DICK those young Platonists have a notion that their vision is imperfect ; they are short-sighted ; what use, then, to strain the visual nerve ? They have left their opera- glasses at home. ' Why, thou monkey, ' said a harpooneer to one of these lads, ' we 've been cruising now hard upon three years, and thou hast not raised a whale yet. Whales are scarce as hen's teeth whenever thou art up here.' Perhaps they were ; or perhaps there might have been shoals of them in the far horizon ; but lulled into such an opium-like listlessness of vacant, unconscious revery is this absent- minded youth by the blending cadence of waves with thoughts, that at last he loses his identity ; takes the mystic ocean at his feet for the visible image of that deep, blue, bottomless soul, pervading mankind and nature ; and every strange, half -seen, gliding, beautiful thing that eludes him ; every dimly discovered, uprising fin of some undiscernible form, seems to him the embodiment of those elusive thoughts that only people the soul by con- tinually flitting through it. In this enchanted mood, thy spirit ebbs away to whence it came ; becomes diffused through time and space ; like Cranmer's sprinkled Pan- theistic ashes, forming at last a part of every shore the round globe over. There is no life in thee, now, except that rocking life imparted by a gently rolling ship ; by her, borrowed from the sea ; by the sea, from the inscrutable tides of God. But while this sleep, this dream is on ye, move your foot or hand an inch ; slip your hold at all ; and your identity comes back in horror. Over Descartian vortices you hover. And perhaps, at mid-day, in the fairest weather, with one half-throttled shriek you drop through that transparent air into the summer sea, no more to rise for- ever. Heed it well, ye Pantheists ! CHAPTER XXXVI THE QUARTEK-DECK (Enter Ahab : Then all.) IT was not a great while after the affair of the pipe, that one morning shortly after breakfast, Ahab, as was his wont, ascended the cabin-gangway to the deck. There most sea-captains usually walk at that hour, as country gentlemen, after the same meal, take a few turns in the garden. Soon his steady, ivory stride was heard, as to and fro he paced his old rounds, upon planks so familiar to his tread, that they were all over dented, like geological stones, with the peculiar mark of his walk. Did you fixedly gaze, too, upon that ribbed and dented brow ; there also, you would see still stranger footprints the footprints of his one unsleeping, ever-pacing thought. But on the occasion hi question, those dents looked deeper, even as his nervous step that morning left a deeper mark. And, so full of his thought was Ahab, that at every uniform turn that he made, now at the main- mast and now at the binnacle, you could almost see that thought turn in him as he turned, and pace in him as he paced ; so completely possessing him, indeed, that it all but seemed the inward mould of every outer movement. ' D' ye mark him, Flask ? ' whispered Stubb ; * the chick that 's in him pecks the shell. 'Twill soon be out.' The hours wore on ; Ahab now shut up within his 199 200 MOBY-DICK cabin ; anon, pacing the deck, with the same intense bigotry of purpose in his aspect. It drew near the close of day. Suddenly he came to a halt by the bulwarks, and inserting his bone leg into the auger-hole there, and with one hand grasping a shroud, he ordered Starbuck to send everybody aft. ' Sir ! ' said the mate, astonished at an order seldom or never given on shipboard except in some extraordinary case. ' Send everybody aft,' repeated Ahab. ' Mast-heads, there ! come down ! ' When the entire ship's company were assembled, and with curious and not wholly unapprehensive faces were eyeing him, for he looked not unlike the weather horizon when a storm is coming up, Ahab, after rapidly glancing over the bulwarks, and then darting his eyes among the crew, started from his standpoint ; and as though not a soul were nigh him resumed his heavy turns upon the deck. With bent head and half-slouched hat he con- tinued to pace, unmindful of the wondering whispering among the men ; till Stubb cautiously whispered to Flask, that Ahab must have summoned them there for the purpose of witnessing a pedestrian feat. But this did not last long. Vehemently pausing, he cried : ' What do ye do when ye see a whale, men ? ' ' Sing out for him ! ' was the impulsive rejoinder from a score of clubbed voices. 4 Good ! ' cried Ahab, with a wild approval in his tones ; observing the hearty animation into which his unexpected question had so magnetically thrown them. ' And what do ye next, men ? ' ' Lower away, and after him ! ' ' And what tune is it ye pull to, men ? ' ' A dead whale or a stove boat ! ' More and more strangely and fiercely glad and approv- THE QUARTER-DECK 201 ing grew the countenance of the old man at every shout ; while the mariners began to gaze curiously at each other, as if marvelling how it was that they them- selves became so excited at such seemingly purposeless questions. But, they were all eagerness again, as Ahab, now half- revolving in his pivot -hole, with one hand reaching high up a shroud, and tightly, almost convulsively grasping it, addressed them thus : ' All ye mast-headers have before now heard me give orders about a white whale. Look ye ! d' ye see this Spanish ounce of gold*? ' holding up a broad bright coin to the sun ' it is a sixteen-dollar piece, men. D' ye see it ? Mr. Starbuck, hand me yon top-maul/ While the mate was getting the hammer, Ahab, without speaking, was slowly rubbing the gold piece against the skirts of his jacket, as if to heighten its lustre, and without using any words was meanwhile lowly humming to him- self, producing a sound so strangely muffled and inarticu- late that it seemed the mechanical humming of the wheels of his vitality in him. Receiving the top-maul from Starbuck, he advanced toward the mainmast with the hammer uplifted in one hand, exhibiting the gold with the other, and with a high raised voice exclaiming : ' Whosoever of ye raises me a white-headed whale with a wrinkled brow and a crooked jaw ; whosoever of ye raises me that white-headed whale, with three holes punctured in his starboard fluke look ye, whosoever of ye raises me that same white whale, he shall have this gold ounce, my boys ! ' ' Huzza ! huzza ! ' cried the seamen, as with swinging tarpaulins they hailed the act of nailing the gold to the mast. ' It 's a white whale, I say,' resumed Ahab, as he threw down the top-maul ; * a white whale. Skin your eyes 202 MOBY-DICK for him, men ; look sharp for white water ; if ye see but a bubble, sing out.' All this while Tashtego, Daggoo, and Queequeg had looked on with even more intense interest and surprise than the rest, and at the mention of the wrinkled brow and crooked jaw they had started as if each was separately touched by some specific recollection. ' Captain Ahab,' said Tashtego, ' that white whale must be the same that some call Moby-Dick.' ' Moby-Dick ? ' shouted Ahab. ' Do ye know the white whale then, Tash ? ' ' Does he fan-tail a little curious, sir, before he goes down ? ' said the Gay-Header deliberately. ' And has he a curious spout, too,' said Daggoo, ' very bushy, even for a parmacetty, and mighty quick, Captain Ahab ? ' 1 And he have one, two, tree oh ! good many iron in him hide, too, captain,' cried Queequeg disjointedly, 4 all twiske-tee be-twisk, like him him ' faltering hard for a word, and screwing his hand round and round as though uncorking a bottle ' like him him ' ' Cork-screw ! ' cried Ahab, ' ay, Queequeg, the har- poons lie all twisted and wrenched in him ; ay, Daggoo, his spout is a big one, like a whole shock of wheat, and white as a pile of our Nantucket wool after the great annual sheep-shearing ; ay, Tashtego, and he fan-tails like a split jib in a squall. Death and devils ! men, it is Moby-Dick ye have seen Moby-Dick Moby-Dick ! ' ' Captain Ahab,' said Starbuck, who, with Stubb and Flask, had thus far been eyeing his superior with increasing surprise, but at last seemed struck with a thought which somewhat explained all the wonder. ' Captain Ahab, I have heard of Moby-Dick but it was not Moby-Dick that took off thy leg ? ' ' Who told thee that ? ' cried Ahab ; then pausing, THE QUARTER-DECK 203 ' Ay, Starbuck ; ay, my hearties all round ; it was Moby-Dick that dismasted me ; Moby-Dick that brought me to this dead stump I stand on now. Ay, ay,' he shouted, with a terrific, loud, animal sob, like that of a heart -stricken moose ; ' Ay, ay ! it was that accursed white whale that razeed me ; made a poor pegging lubber of me for ever and a day ! ' Then tossing both arms, with measureless imprecations he shouted out : ' Ay, ay ! and I '11 chase him round Good Hope, and round the Horn, and round the Norway Maelstrom, and round perdition's flames before I give him up. And this is what ye have shipped for, men ! to chase that white whale on both sides of land, and over all sides of earth, till he spouts black blood and rolls fin out. What say ye, men, will ye splice hands on it, now ? I think ye do look brave/ * Ay, ay ! ' shouted the harpooneers and seamen, running closer to the excited old man : ' a sharp eye for the White Whale ; a sharp lance for Moby-Dick ! ' ' God bless ye,' he seemed to half sob and half shout. ' God bless ye, men. Steward ! go draw the great measure of grog. But what 's this long face about, Mr. Starbuck ; wilt thou not chase the White Whale ? art not game for Moby-Dick ? ' ' I am game for his crooked jaw, and for the jaws of Death too, Captain Ahab, if it fairly comes in the way of the business we follow ; but I came here to hunt whales, not my commander's vengeance. How many barrels will thy vengeance yield thee even if thou gettest it, Captain Ahab ? it will not fetch thee much in our Nan- tucket market.' ' Nantucket market ! Hoot ! But come closer, Star- buck ; thou requirest a little lower layer. If money 's to be the measurer, man, and the accountants have com- puted their great counting-house the globe, by girdling it with guineas, one to every three parts of an inch ; then, 204 MOBY-DICK let me tell thee, that my vengeance will fetch a great premium here ! ' ' He smites his chest/ whispered Stubb, ' what 's that for ? methinks it rings most vast, but hollow.' ' Vengeance on a dumb brute ! ' cried Starbuck, ' that simply smote thee from blindest instinct ! Madness ! To be enraged with a dumb thing, Captain Ahab, seems \ blapkemous.' ' Hark ye yet again, the little lower layer. All visible objects, man, are but as pasteboard masks. But in each event in the living act, the undoubted deed there, some unknown but still reasoning thing puts forth the mouldings of its features from behind the unreasoning mask. If man will strike, strike through the mask ! How can the prisoner reach outside except by thrusting through the wall ? To me, the White Whale is that wall, shoved near to me. Sometimes I think there 's naught beyond. But 'tis enough. He tasks me ; he heaps me ; I see in him out- rageous strength, with an inscrutable malice sinewing it. That inscrutable thing is chiefly what I hate ; and be the White Whale agent, or be the White Whale principal, I will wreak that hate upon him. Talk not to me of blasphemy, man ; I 'd strike the sun if it insulted me. For could the sun do that, then could I do the other ; since there is ever a sort of fair play herein, jealousy presiding over all creations. But not my master, man, is even that fair play. Who 's over me ? Truth hath no confines. Take off thine eye ! more intolerable than fiends' glarings is a doltish stare ! So, so ; thou reddenest and palest ; my heat has melted thee to anger-glow. But look ye, Star- buck, what is said in heat, that thing unsays itself. There are men from whom warm words are small indignity. I meant not to incense thee. Let it go. Look ! see yonder Turkish cheeks of spotted tawn living, breathing pictures painted by the sun. The pagan leopards the unrecking THE QUARTER-DECK 205 and un worshipping things, that live ; and seek, and give no reasons for the torrid life they feel ! The crew, man, the crew ! Are they not one and all with Ahab, in this matter of the whale ? See Stubb ! he laughs ! See yonder Chilian ! he snorts to think of it. Stand up amid the general hurricane, thy one tost sapling cannot, Star- buck ! And what is it ? Reckon it. 'Tis but to help strike a fin ; no wondrous feat for Starbuck. What is it more ? From this one poor hunt, then, the best lance out of all Nantucket, surely he will not hang back, when every foremast -hand has clutched a whetstone ? Ah ! constrainings seize thee ; I see ! the billow lifts thee ! Speak, but speak ! Ay, ay ! thy silence, then, that voices thee. (Aside) Something shot from my dilated nostrils, he has inhaled it in his lungs. Starbuck now is mine ; cannot oppose me now, without rebellion.' 4 God keep me ! keep us all ! ' murmured Starbuck lowly. But in his joy at the enchanted, tacit acquiescence of the mate, Ahab did not hear his foreboding invocation ; nor yet the low laugh from the hold ; nor yet the presaging vibrations of the winds in the cordage ; nor yet the hollow flap of the sails against the masts, as for a moment their hearts sank in. For again Starbuck's downcast eyes lighted up with the stubbornness of life ; the subterranean laugh died away ; the winds blew on ; the sails filled out ; the ship heaved and rolled as before. Ah, ye admoni- tions and warnings ! why stay ye not when ye come ? But rather are ye predictions than warnings, ye shadows ! Yet not so much predictions from without, as verifications of the foregoing things within. For with little external to constrain us, the innermost necessities in our being, these still drive us on. ' The measure ! the measure ! ' cried Ahab. Receiving the brimming pewter, and turning to the 206 MOBY-DICK harpooneers, he ordered them to produce their weapons. Then ranging them before him near the capstan, with their harpoons in their hands, while his three mates stood at his side with their lances, and the rest of the ship's company formed a circle round the group ; he stood for an instant searchingly eyeing every man of his crew. But those wild eyes met his, as the bloodshot eyes of the prairie wolves meet the eye of their leader, ere he rushes on at their head in the trail of the bison ; but, alas ! only to fall into the hidden snare of the Indian. * Drink and pass ! ' he cried, handing the heavy charged flagon to the nearest seaman. ' The crew alone now drink. Round with it, round ! Short draughts long swallows, men ; 'tis hot as Satan's hoof. So, so ; it goes round excellently. It spiralises in ye ; forks out at the serpent -snapping eye. Well done ; almost drained. That way it went, this way it comes. Hand it me j here 's a hollow ! Men, ye seem the years ; so brimming ! life is gulped and gone. Steward, refill ! ' Attend now, my braves. I have mustered ye all round this capstan ; and ye, mates, flank me with your lances ; and ye, harpooneers, stand there with your irons ; and ye, stout mariners, ring me in, that I may in some sort revive a noble custom of my fisherman fathers before me. men, you will yet see that Ha ! boy, come back ? bad pennies come not sooner. Hand it me. Why, now, this pewter had run brimming again, wert not thou St. Vitus' imp away, thou ague ! ' Advance, ye mates ! Cross your lances full before me. Well done ! Let me touch the axis.' So saying, with extended arm, he grasped the three level, radiating lances at their crossed centre ; while so doing, suddenly and nervously twitched them ; meanwhile, glancing intently from Starbuck to Stubb, from Stubb to Flask. It seemed as though, by some nameless, interior volition, THE QUARTER-DECK 207 he would fain have shocked into them the same fiery emotion accumulated within the Leyden jar of his own magnetic life. The three mates quailed before his strong, sustained, and mystic aspect. Stubb and Flask looked sideways from him ; the honest eye of Starbuck fell downright. ' In vain ! ' cried Ahab ; ' but, maybe, 'tis well. For did ye three but once take the full-forced shock, then mine own electric thing, that had perhaps expired from out me. Perchance, too, it would have dropped ye dead. Perchance ye need it not. Down lances ! And now, ye mates, I do appoint ye three cup-bearers to my three pagan kinsmen there yon three most honourable gentle- men and noblemen, my valiant harpooneers. Disdain the task ? What, when the great Pope washes the feet of beggars, using his tiara for ewer ? Oh, my sweet cardinals ! your own condescension, that shall bend ye to it. I do not order ye ; ye will it. Cut your seizings and draw the poles, ye harpooneers ! ' Silently obeying the order, the three harpooneers now stood with the detached iron part of their harpoons, some three feet long, held, barbs up, before him. ' Stab me not with that keen steel ! Cant them ; cant them over ! know ye not the goblet end ? Turn up the socket ! So, so ; now, ye cup-bearers, advance. The irons ! take them ; hold them while I fill ! ' Forth- with, slowly going from one officer to the other, he brimmed the harpoon sockets with the fiery waters from the pewter. ' Now, three to three, ye stand. Commend the murder- ous chalices ! Bestow them, ye who are now made parties to this indissoluble league. Ha ! Starbuck ! but the deed is done ! Yon ratifying sun now waits to sit upon it. Drink, ye harpooneers ! drink and swear, ye men that man the deathful whale-boat's bow Death to 1 208 MOBY-DICK Moby-Dick ! God hunt us all, if we do not hunt Moby- Dick to his death ! ' The long, barbed steel goblets were lifted ; and to cries and maledictions against the White Whale, the spirits were simultaneously quaffed down with a hiss. Starbuck paled, and turned, and shivered. Once more, and finally, the replenished pewter went the rounds among the frantic crew ; when, waving his free hand to them, they all dispersed ; and Ahab retired within his cabin. CHAPTER XXXVII SUNSET (The cabin ; by the stern windows ; Ahab sitting alone, and gazing out.) I LEAVE a white and turbid wake ; pale waters, paler cheeks, where'er I sail. The envious billows sidelong swell to whelm my track ; let them ; but first I pass. Yonder, by the ever-brimming goblet's rim, the warm waves blush like wine. The gold brow plumbs the blue. The diver sun slow dived from noon, goes down ; my soul mounts up ! she wearies with her endless hill. Is, then, the crown too heavy that I wear ? this Iron Crown of Lombardy. Yet is it bright with many a gem ; I, the wearer, see not its far flashings ; but darkly feel that I wear that, that dazzlingly confounds. 'Tis iron that I know not gold. 'Tis split, too that I feel ; the jagged edge galls me so, my brain seems to beat against the solid metal ; ay, steel skull, mine ; the sort that needs no helmet in the most brain-battering fight ! Dry heat upon my brow ? Oh ! time was, when as the sunrise nobly spurred me, so the sunset soothed. No more. This lovely light, it lights not me ; all loveliness is anguish to me, since I can ne'er enjoy. Gifted with the high perception, I lack the low, enjoying power ; damned, most subtly ana most malignantly ! damned in the midst , of Paradise ! Good night good night ! (Waving his ' hand, he moves from the window.) 'Twas not so hard a task. I thought to find one stub- VOL. I. O 210 MOBY-DICK born, at the least ; but my one cogged circle fits into all their various wheels, and they revolve. Or, if you will, like so many ant-hills of powder, they all stand before me ; and I their match. Oh, hard ! that to fire others, the match itself must needs be wasting ! What I Ve dared, I Ve willed ; and what I Ve willed, I '11 do ! They think me mad Starbuck does ; but I 'm demoniac, I am mad- ness maddened ! That wild madness that 's only calm to comprehend itself ! The prophecy was that I should be dismembered ; and Ay ! I lost this leg. I now prophesy that I will dismember my dismemberer. JJow* then, be the prophet and the fulfiUer one. That 's more than ye, ye great gods, ever were. I laugh and hoot at ye, ye cricket -players, ye pugilists, ye deaf Burkes and blinded Bendigoes ! I will not say as schoolboys do to bullies, Take some one of your own size ; don't pommel me \ No, ye Ve knocked me down, and I am up again ; but ye have run and hidden. Come forth from behind your cotton bags ! I have no long gun to reach ye. Come, Ahab's compliments to ye ; come and see if ye can swerve me. Swerve me ? ye cannot swerve me, else ye swerve yourselves ! man has ye there. Swerve me ? The path to my fixed purpose is laid with iron rails, where - on" my soul is grooved to run. Over unsounded gorges, through the rifled hearts of mountains, under torrents' beds, unerringly I rush ! Naught J s an obstacle, naught 's an angle to the iron way ! CHAPTER XXXVIII DUSK (By the mainmast ; Starbuck leaning against it.) MY soul is* more than matched ; she 's overmanned ; and by a madman ! Insufferable sting, that sanity should ground arms on such a field ! But he drilled deep down, and blasted all my reason out of me ! I think I see his impious end ; but feel that I must help him to it. Will I, nill I, the ineffable thing has tied me to him ; tows me with a cable I have no knife to cut. Horrible old man ! Who 's over him, he cries ; ay, he would be a democrat \^ to all above ; look, how he lords it over all below ! Oh ! I plainly see my miserable office, to obey, rebelling ; and worse yet, to hate with touch of pity ! For in his eyes I read some lurid woe would shrivel me up, had I it. Yet is there hope. Time and tide flow wide. The hated whale has the round watery world to swim in, as the small gold-fish has its glassy globe. His heaven-insulting pur- pose, God may wedge aside. I would up heart, were it not like lead. But my whole clock 's run down ; my heart the all-controlling weight, I have no key to lift again. (A burst of revelry from the forecastle.) Oh, God ! to sail with such a heathen crew that have small touch of human mothers in them ! Whelped some- where by the sharkish sea. The White Whale is their demigorgon. Hark ! the infernal orgies ! that revelry is forward ! mark the unfaltering silence aft ! Methinks 211 212 MOBY-DICK it pictures life. Foremost through the sparkling sea shoots on the gay, embattled, bantering bow, but only to drag dark Ahab after it, where he broods within his stern- ward cabin, builded over the dead water of the wake, and further on, hunted by its wolfish gurglings. The long howl thrills me through ! Peace ! ye revellers, and set the watch ! Oh, life ! 'tis in an hour like this, with soul beat down and held to knowledge, as wild, untutored things are forced to feed Oh, life ! 'tis now that I do feel the latent horror in thee ! but 'tis not me ! that horror 's out of me ! and with the soft feeling of ^ejiuman in me, yet ^will I try to fight ye, "ye grim, phantom futures ! Stand by me, hold me, bind me, ye blessed influences ! CHAPTER XXXIX FIRST NIGHT-WATCH FORE-TOP (Stubb solus, and mending a brace.) HA ! ha ! ha ! ha ! hem ! clear my throat ! I Ve been thinking over it ever since, and that ha, ha 3 s the final consequence. Why so ? Because a laugh 's the wisest, easiest answer to all that 's queer ; and come what will, one comfort 's always left that unfailing comfort is, it 's all predestinated. I heard not all his talk with Starbuck ; but to my poor eye Starbuck then looked something as I the other evening felt. Be sure the old Mogul has fixed him, too. I twigged it, knew it ; had had the gift, might readily have prophesied it for when I clapped my eye upon his skull I saw it. Well, Stubb, wise Stubb that 's my title well, Stubb, what of it, Stubb ? Here 's a carcase. I know not all that may be coming, but be it what it will, I '11 go to it laughing. Such a waggish leering as lurks in all your horribles ! I feel funny. Fa, la ! lirra, skirra ! What 's my juicy little pear at home doing now ? Crying its eyes out ? Giving a party to the last arrived harpooneers, I dare say, gay as a frigate's pennant, and so am I fa, la ! lirra, skirra ! Oh We '11 drink to-night with hearts as light, To love, as gay and fleeting As bubbles that swim, on the beaker's brim, And break on the lips while meeting. A brave stave that who calls ? Mr. Starbuck ? Ay, ay, sir (Aside) he 's my superior, he has his too, if I 'm not mistaken. Ay, ay, sir, just through with this job coming. 213 CHAPTER XL MIDNIGHT, FORECASTLE HABPOONEERS AND SAILORS (Foresail rises and discovers the match standing, lounging, leaning, and lying in various attitudes, all singing in chorus.) Farewell and adieu to you, Spanish ladies ! Farewell and adieu to you, ladies of Spain ! Our captain's commanded. 1ST NANTUCKET SAILOE. Oh, boys, don't be sentimental ; it 's bad for the digestion ! Take a tonic, follow me ! (Sings, and all follow.) Our captain stood upon the deck, A spy-glass in his hand, A-viewing of those gallant whales That blew at every strand. Oh, your tubs in your boats, my boys, And by your braces stand, And we '11 have one of those fine whales, Hand, boys, over hand ! So, be cheery, my lads ! may your hearts never fail ! While the bold harpooneer is striking the whale ! MATE'S VOICE FROM THE QUARTER-DECK. Eight bells there, forward ! 214 MIDNIGHT, FORECASTLE 215 2ND NANTUCKET SAILOR. Avast the chorus ! Eight bells there ! <T ye hear, bell-boy ? Strike the bell eight, thou Pip ! thou black- ling ! and let me call the watch. I 've the sort of mouth for that the hogshead mouth. So, so, (thrusts his head down the scuttle) Star bo-1-e-e-n-s, a-h-o-y ! Eight bells there below ! Tumble up ! DUTCH SAILOR. Grand snoozing to-night, maty ; fat night for that. I mark this in our old Mogul's wine ; it 's quite as deaden- ing to some as filliping to others. We sing ; they sleep- ay, lie down there, like ground-tier butts. At 'em again ! There, take this copper-pump, and hail 'em through it. Tell 'em to avast dreaming of their lasses. Tell 'em it 's the resurrection ; they must kiss their last, and come to judgment. That 's the way that 's it ; thy throat ain't spoiled with eating Amsterdam butter. FRENCH SAILOR. Hist, boys ! let 's have a jig or two before we ride to anchor in Blanket Bay. What say ye ? There comes the other watch. Stand by, all legs ! Pip ! little Pip ! hurrah with your tambourine ! PIP. (Sulky and sleepy.) Don't know where it is. FRENCH SAILOR. Beat thy belly, then, and wag thy ears. Jig it, men, I say ; merry 's the word ; hurrah ! Damn me, won't you dance ? Form, now, Indian-file, and gallop into the double-shuffle ! Throw yourselves ! Legs ! legs ! 216 MOBY-DICK ICELAND SAILOE. I don't like your floor, maty ; it 's too springy to my taste. I 'm used to ice-floors. I 'm sorry to throw cold water on the subject ; but excuse me. MALTESE SAILOR. Me too ; where 's your girls ? Who but a fool would take his left hand by his right, and say to himself, how d' ye do ? Partners ! I must have partners ! SICILIAN SAILOR. Ay ; girls and a green ! then I '11 hop with ye ; yea, turn grasshopper ! LONG-ISLAND SAILOR. Well, well, ye sulkies, there 's plenty more of us. Hoe corn when you may, say I. All legs go to harvest soon. Ah ! here comes the music ; now for it ! AZORE SAILOR. (Ascending, and pitching the tambourine up the scuttle.) Here you are, Pip ; and there J s the windlass-bitts ; up you mount ! Now, boys ! (The half of them dance to the tambourine ; some go below ; some sleep or lie among the coils of rigging. Oaths a-plenty.) AZORE SAILOR. (Dancing.) Go it, Pip ! Bang it, bell-boy ! Rig, it, dig it, stig it, quig it, bell-boy ! Make fire-flies ; break the jinglers ! PIP. Jinglers, you say ? there goes another, dropped off ; I pound it so. MIDNIGHT, FORECASTLE 217 CHINA SAILOR. Rattle thy teeth, then, and pound away ; make a pagoda of thyself. FRENCH SAILOR. Merry-mad ! Hold up thy hoop, Pip, till I jump through it ! Split jibs ! tear yourselves ! TASHTEGO. (Quietly smoking.) That 's a white man ; he calls that fun : humph ! I j save my sweat. OLD MANX SAILOR. I wonder whether those jolly lads bethink them of what they are dancing over. I '11 dance over your grave, I will that 's the bitterest threat of your night-women, that beat head- winds round corners. O Christ ! to think of the green navies and the green-skulled crews ! Well, well ; belike the whole world 's a ball, as you scholars have it ; and so 'tis right to make one ball-room of it. Dance on, lads, you 're young ; I was once. 3RD NANTUCKET SAILOR. Spell oh ! whew ! this is worse than pulling after whales in a calm give us a whiff, Tash. (They cease dancing, and gather in clusters. Meantime the sky darkens the wind rises.) LASCAR SAILOR. By Brahma ! boys, it '11 be douse sail soon. The sky-born, high -tide Ganges turned to wind ! Thou showest thy black brow, Seeva ! 218 MOBY-DICK MALTESE SAILOR. (Reclining and shaking his cap.) It 's the waves the snow's caps turn to jig it now. They '11 shake their tassels soon. Now would all the waves were women, then I 'd go drown, and chassee with them evermore ! There 's naught so sweet on earth heaven may not match it ! as those swift glances of warm, wild bosoms in the dance, when the over-arbour- ing arms hide such ripe, bursting grapes. SICILIAN SAILOE. (Reclining.) Tell me not of it ! Hark ye, lad fleet interfacings of the limbs lithe swayings covings flutterings ! lip ! heart ! hip ! all graze : unceasing touch and go ! not taste, observe ye, else come satiety. Eh, Pagan ? (Nudging.) TAHITIAN SAILOR. (Reclining on a mat.) Hail, holy nakedness of our dancing girls ! the Heeva- Heeva ! Ah ! low-veiled, high-palmed Tahiti ! I still rest me on thy mat, but the soft soil has slid ! I saw thee woven in the wood, my mat ! green the first day I brought ye thence ; now worn and wilted quite. Ah me ! not thou nor I can bear the change ! How then, if so be transplanted to yon sky ? Hear I the roaring streams from Pirohitee's peak of spears, when they leap down the crags and drown the villages ? The blast ! the blast ! Up, spine, and meet it ! (Leaps to his feet.) MIDNIGHT, FORECASTLE 219 PORTUGUESE SAILOR. How the sea rolls swashing 'gainst the side ! Stand by for reefing, hearties ! the winds are just crossing swords, pell-mell they '11 go lunging presently. DANISH SAILOR. Crack, crack, old ship ! so long as thou crackest, thou boldest ! Well done ! The mate there holds ye to it stiffly. He 's no more afraid than the isle fort at Cattegat, put there to fight the Baltic with storm-lashed guns, on which the sea-salt cakes ! 4TH NANTUCKET SAILOR. He has his orders, mind ye that. I heard old Ahab tell him he must always kill a squall, something as they burst a waterspout with a pistol fire your ship right into it ! ENGLISH SAILOR. Blood ! but that old man 's a grand old cove ! We are the lads to hunt him up his whale ! ALL. Ay ! ay ! OLD MANX SAILOR. How the three pines shake ! Pines are the hardest sort of tree to live when shifted to any other soil, and here there 's none but the crew's cursed clay. Steady, helms- man ! steady. This is the sort of weather when brave hearts snap ashore, and keeled hulls split at sea. Our captain has his birth-mark ; look yonder, boys, there 's another in the sky lurid-like, ye see, all else pitch black. DAGGOO. What of that ? Who 's afraid of black 's afraid of me ! I 'm quarried out of it ! 220 MOBY-DICK SPANISH SAILOR. (Aside.) He wants to bully, ah ! the old grudge makes me touchy. (Advancing.) Ay, harpooneer, thy race is the undeniable dark side of mankind devilish dark at that. No offence. DAGGOO (grimly). None. ST. JAGO'S SAILOR. That Spaniard 's mad or drunk. But that can't be, or else in his one case our old Mogul's fire-waters are somewhat long in working. 5TH NANTUCKET SAILOR. What 's that I saw lightning ? Yes. SPANISH SAILOR. No ; Daggoo showing his teeth. DAGGOO (springing). Swallow thine, manikin ! White skin, white liver ! SPANISH SAILOR (meeting him). Knife thee heartily ! big frame, small spirit ! ALL. A row ! a row ! a row ! TASHTEGO (with a whiff). A row alow, and a row aloft Gods and men both brawlers ! Humph ! BELFAST SAILOR. A row ! arrah a row ! The Virgin be blessed, a row ! Plunge in with ye ! MIDNIGHT, FORECASTLE 221 ENGLISH SAILOR. Fair play ! Snatch the Spaniard's knife ! A ring, a ring ! OLD MANX SAILOR. Ready formed. There ! the ringed horizon. In that ring Cain struck Abel. Sweet work, right work ! No ? Why then, God, mad'st thou the ring ? MATE'S VOICE FROM THE QUARTER-DECK. Hands by the halyards ! in top-gallant-sails ! Stand by to reef topsails ! ALL. The squall ! the squall ! jump, my jollies ! (They scatter.) PIP (shrinking under the windlass). Jollies ? Lord help such jollies ! Crish, crash ! there goes the jib-stay ! Blang-whang ! God ! Duck lower, Pip, here comes the royal yard ! It 's worse than being in the whirled woods, the last day of the year ! Who 'd go climbing after chestnuts now ? But there they go, all cursing, and here I don't. Fine prospects to 'em ; they 're on the road to heaven. Hold on hard ! Jimmini, what a squall ! But those chaps there are worse yet they are your white squalls, they. White squalls ? white whale, shirr ! shirr ! Here have I heard all their chat just now, and the White Whale shirr ! shirr ! but spoken of once ! and only this evening it makes me jingle all over like my tambourine that anaconda of an old man swore 'em in to hunt him ! Oh, thou big white God aloft there somewhere in yon darkness, have mercy on this small black boy down here ; preserve him from all men that have no bowels to feel fear ! ******* CHAPTER XLI MOBY-DICK I, ISHMAEL, was one of that crew ; my shouts had gone up with the rest ; my oath had been welded with theirs ; and stronger I shouted, and more did I hammer and clinch my oath, because of the dread in my soul. A wild, mystical, sympathetical feeling was in me ; Ahab's quenchless feud seemed mine. With greedy ears I learned the history of that murderous monster against whom I and all the others had taken our oaths of violence and revenge. For some time past, though at intervals only, the un- accompanied, secluded White Whale had haunted those uncivilised seas mostly frequented by the sperm whale fishermen. But not all of them knew of his existence ; only a few of them, comparatively, had knowingly seen him ; while the number who as yet had actually and knowingly given battle to him, was small indeed. For, owing to the large number of whale-cruisers ; the dis- orderly way they were sprinkled over the entire watery circumference, many of them adventurously pushing their quest along solitary latitudes, so as seldom or never for a whole twelvemonth or more on a stretch, to en- counter a single news-telling sail of any sort ; the inordin- ate length of each separate voyage ; the irregularity of the times of sailing from home ; all these, with other circum- stances, direct and indirect, long obstructed the spread through the whole world- wide whaling-fleet of the special individualising tidings concerning Moby-Dick. It was 222 MOBY-DICK 223 hardly to be doubted, that several vessels reported to have encountered, at such or such a time, or on such or such a meridian, a sperm whale of uncommon magnitude and malignity, which whale, after doing great mischief to his assailants, had completely escaped them ; to some minds it was not an* unfair presumption, I say, that the whale in question must have been no other than Moby-Dick. Yet as of late the sperm whale fishery had been marked by various and not unfrequent instances of great ferocity, cunning, and malice in the monster attacked ; therefore it was, that those who by accident ignorantly gave battle to Moby-Dick ; such hunters, perhaps, for the most part, were content to ascribe the peculiar terror he bred, more, as it were, to the perils of the sperm whale fishery at large, than to the individual cause. In that way, mostly, the disastrous encounter between Ahab and the whale had hitherto been popularly regarded. And as for those who, previously hearing of the White Whale, by chance caught sight of him ; in the beginning of the thing they had every one of them, almost, as boldly and fearlessly lowered for him, as for any other whale of that species. But at length, such calamities did ensue in these assaults not restricted to sprained wrists and ankles, broken limbs, or devouring amputations but fatal to the last degree of fatality ; those repeated disas- trous repulses, all accumulating and piling their terrors upon Moby -Dick ; those things had gone far to shake the fortitude of many brave hunters, to whom the story of the White Whale had eventually come. Nor did wild rumours of all sorts fail to exaggerate, and still the more horrify the true histories of these deadly encounters. For not only do fabulous rumours naturally grow out of the very body of all surprising terrible events, as the smitten tree gives birth to its fungi ; but, in maritime life, far more than in that of terra-firma, wild 224 MOBY-DICK rumours abound, wherever there is any adequate reality for them to cling to. And as the sea surpasses the land in this matter, so the whale-fishery surpasses every other sort of maritime life, in the wonderfulness and fearful- ness of the rumours which sometimes circulate there. For not only are whalemen as a body unexempt from that ignorance and superstitiousness hereditary to all sailors ; but of all sailors, they are by all odds the most directly brought into contact with whatever is appallingly astonish- ing in the sea ; face to face they not only eye its greatest marvels, but, hand to jaw, give battle to them. Alone, in such remotest waters, that though you sailed a thousand miles, and passed a thousand shores, you would not come to any chiselled hearthstone, or aught hospitable beneath that part of the sun ; in such latitudes and longitudes, pursuing too such a calling as he does, the whaleman is wrapped by influences all tending to make his fancy pregnant with many a mighty birth. No wonder, then, that ever gathering volume from the mere transit over the wildest watery spaces, the outblown rumours of the White Whale did in the end incorporate with themselves all manner of morbid hints, and half- formed foetal suggestions of supernatural agencies, which eventually invested Moby-Dick with new terrors un- borrowed from anything that visibly appears. So that in many cases such a panic did he finally strike, that few who by those rumours, at least, had heard of the White Whale, few of those hunters were willing to encounter the perils of his jaw. But there were still other and more vital practical influences at work. Not even at the present day has the original prestige of the sperm whale, as fearfully dis- tinguished from all other species of the leviathan, died out of the minds of the whalemen as a body. There are those this day among them, who, though intelligent and cour- MOBY-DICK 225 ageous enough in offering battle to the Greenland or right whale, would perhaps, either from professional inexperi- ence, or incompetency, or timidity, decline a contest with the sperm whale ; at any rate, there are plenty of whale- men, especially among those whaling nations not sailing under the American flag, who have never hostilely en- countered the sperm whale, but whose sole knowledge of the leviathan is restricted to the ignoble monster primitively pursued in the North ; seated on their hatches, these men will hearken with a childish fireside interest and awe, to the wild, strange tales of Southern whaling. Nor is the pre-eminent tremendousness of the great sperm whale anywhere more feelingly compre- hended, than on board of those prows which stem him. And as if the now tested reality of his might had in former legendary times thrown its shadow before it ; we find some book naturalists Olassen and Povelson declaring the sperm whale not only to be a consternation to every other creature in the sea, but also to be so in- credibly ferocious as continually to be athirst for human \ blood. Nor even down to so late a time as Cuvier's, were these or almost similar impressions effaced. For in his Natural History, the Baron himself affirms that at sight of the sperm whale, all fish (sharks included) are 'struck with the most lively terrors,' and 'often in the precipitancy of their flight dash themselves against the rocks with such violence as to cause instantaneous death.' And however the general experiences in the fishery may amend such reports as these ; yet in their full terribleness, even to the bloodthirsty item of Povelson, the super- stitious belief in them is, in some vicissitudes of their vocation, revived in the minds of the hunters. So that overawed by the rumours and portents concern- ing him, not a few of the fishermen recalled, in reference to Moby-Dick, the earlier days of the sperm whale fishery, VOL. i. p 226 MOBY-DICK when it was oftentimes hard to induce long -practised right whalemen to embark in the perils of this new and daring warfare ; such men protesting that although other leviathans might be hopefully pursued, yet to chase and point lance at such an apparition as the sperm whale was not for mortal man. That to attempt it, would be inevit- ably to be torn into a quick eternity. On this head, there are some remarkable documents that may be consulted. Nevertheless, some there were, who even in the face of these things were ready to give chase to Moby-Dick ; and a still greater number who, chancing only to hear of him distantly and vaguely, without the specific details of any certain calamity, and without superstitious accompani- ments, were sufficiently hardy not to flee from the battle if offered. One of the wild suggestings referred to, as at last coming to be linked with the White Whale in the minds of the superstitiously inclined, was the unearthly conceit that Moby-Dick was ubiquitous ; that he had actually been encountered in opposite latitudes at one and the same instant of time. Nor, credulous as such minds must have been, was this conceit altogether without some faint show of super- stitious probability. For as the secrets of the currents in the seas have never yet been divulged, even to the most erudite research ; so the hidden ways of the sperm whale when beneath the surface remain, in great part, unaccountable to his pursuers ; and from time to time have originated the most curious and contradictory specu- lations regarding them, especially concerning the mystic modes whereby, after sounding to a great depth, he trans- ports himself with such vast swiftness to the most widely distant points. It is a thing well known to both American and English MOBY-DICK 227 whale-ships, and as well a thing placed upon authoritative record years ago by Scoresby, that some whales have been captured far north in the Pacific, in whose bodies have been found the barbs of harpoons darted in the Greenland seas. Nor is it to be gainsaid, that in some of these instances it has been declared that the interval of time between the two assaults could not have exceeded very many days. Hence, by inference, it has been believed by some whale- men, that the Nor'- West Passage, so long a problem to man, was never a problem to the whale. So that here, in the real living experience of living men, the prodigies related in old times of the inland Strello mountain in Portugal (near whose top there was said to be a lake in which the wrecks of ships floated up to the surface) ; and that still more wonderful story of the Arethusa fountain near Syracuse (whose waters were believed to have come from the Holy Land by an underground passage) ; these fabulous narrations are almost fully equalled by the realities of the whaleman. Forced into familiarity, then, with such prodigies as these ; and knowing that after repeated, intrepid assaults, the White Whale had escaped alive ; it cannot be much matter of surprise that some whalemen should go still further in their superstitions ; declaring Moby-Dick not only ubiquitous, but immortal (for immortality is but ubiquity in time) ; that though groves of spears should be planted in his flanks, he would still swim away un- harmed ; or if indeed he should ever be made to spout thick blood, such a sight would be but a ghastly decep- tion ; for again in unensanguined billows hundreds of leagues away, his unsullied jet would once more be seen. But even stripped of these supernatural surmisings, there was enough in the earthly make and incontestable character of the monster to strike the imagination with unwonted power. For, it was not so much his uncommon 228 MOBY-DICK bulk that so much distinguished him from other sperm whales, but, as was elsewhere thrown out a peculiar snow-white wrinkled forehead, and a high, pyramidical white hump. These were his prominent features ; the tokens whereby, even hi the limitless, uncharted seas, he revealed his identity, at a long distance, to those who knew him. The rest of his body was so streaked, and spotted, and marbled with the same shrouded hue, that, in the end, he had gained his distinctive appellation of the White Whale ; a name, indeed, literally justified by his vivid aspect, when seen gliding at high noon through a dark blue sea, leaving a milky-way wake of creamy foam, all spangled with golden gleamings. Nor was it his unwonted magnitude, nor his remarkable hue, nor yet his deformed lower jaw, that so much in- vested the whale with natural terror, as that unexampled, intelligent malignity which, according to specific accounts, he had over and over again evinced in his assaults. More than all, his treacherous retreats struck more of dismay than perhaps aught else. For, when swimming before his exulting pursuers, with every apparent symptom of alarm, he had several times been known to turn round suddenly, and, bearing down upon them, either stave their boats to splinters, or drive them back in consterna- tion to their ship. Already several fatalities had attended his chase. But though similar disasters, however little bruited ashore, were by no means unusual in the fishery ; yet, in most instances, such seemed the White Whale's infernal aforethought of ferocity, that every dismembering or death that he caused, was not wholly regarded as having been inflicted by an unintelligent agent. Judge, then, to what pitches of inflamed, distracted fury the minds of his more desperate hunters were im- MOBY-DICK 229 pelled, when amid the chips of chewed boats, and the sinking limbs of torn comrades, they swam out of the white curds of the whale's direful wrath into the serene, exasperating sunlight, that smiled on, as if at a birth or a bridal. His three boats stove around him, and oars and men both whirling in the eddies, one captain, seizing the line- knife from his broken prow, had dashed at the whale, as an Arkansas duellist at his foe, blindly seeking with a six-inch blade to reach the fathom-deep life of the whale. That captain was Ahab. And then it was, that suddenly sweeping his sickle -shaped lower jaw beneath him, Moby- Dick had reaped away Ahab's leg, as a mower a blade of grass in the field. No turbaned Turk, no hired Venetian or Malay, could have smote him with more seeming malice. Small reason was there to doubt, then, that ever since that almost fatal encounter, Ahab had cherished a wild vindictiveness against the whale, all the more fell for that in his frantic morbidness he at last came to identify with him, not only all his bodily woes, but all his intellectual and spiritual exasperations. The White Whale swam before him as the monomaniac incarnation of all those malicious agencies which some deep men feel eating in them, till they are left living on with half a heart and half a lung. That intangible malignity which has been from the beginning ; to whose dominion even the modern Christians ascribe one-half of the worlds ; which the ancient Ophites of the East reverenced in their statue devil ; Ahab did not fall down and worship it like them ; but deliriously transferring its idea to the abhorred White Whale, he pitted himself, all mutilated, against it. All that most maddens and torments ; all that stirs up the lees of things ; all truth with malice in it ; all that cracks the sinews and cakes the brain ; all the subtle demonisms of life and thought ; all evil, to 230 MOBY-DICK crazy Ahab, were visibly personified, and made practically assailable in Moby-Dick. He piled upon the whale's white hump the sum of all the general rage and hate felt by his whole race from Adam down ; and then, as if his chest had been a mortar, he burst his hot heart's shell upon it. It is not probable that this monomania in him took its instant rise at the precise time of his bodily dismember- ment. Then, in darting at the monster, knife in hand, he had but given loose to a sudden, passionate, corporal animosity ; and when he received the stroke that tore him, he probably but felt the agonising bodily laceration, but nothing more. Yet, when by this collision forced to turn toward home, and for long months of days and weeks, Ahab and anguish lay stretched together in one ham- mock, rounding in mid- winter that dreary, howling Pata- gonian Cape ; then it was, that his torn body and gashed soul bled into one another ; and so interfusing, made him mad. That it was only then, on the homeward voyage, after the encounter, that the final monomania seized him, seems all but certain from the fact that, at intervals during the passage, he was a raving lunatic ; and, though un- limbed of a leg, yet such vital strength yet lurked in his Egyptian chest, and was moreover intensified by his delirium, that his mates were forced to lace him fast, even there, as he sailed, raving in his hammock. In a strait -jacket, he swung to the mad rockings of the gales. And, when running into more sufferable latitudes, the ship, with mild stun '-sails spread, floated across the tranquil tropics, and, to all appearances, the old man's delirium seemed left behind him with the Cape Horn swells, and he came forth from his dark den into the blessed light and air ; even then, when he bore that firm, collected front, however pale, and issued his calm orders once again ; and his mates thanked God the direful madness was now MOBY-DICK 231 gone ; even then, Ahab, in his hidden self, raved on. Human madness is oftentimes a cunning and most feline thing. When you think it fled, it may have but become transfigured into some still subtler form. Ahab's full lunacy subsided not, but deepeningly contracted ; like the unabated Hudson, when that noble Northman flows narrowly, but unfathomably through the Highland gorge. But, as in his narrow-flowing monomania, not one jot of Ahab's broad madness had been left behind ; so in that broad madness, not one jot of his great natural intellect had perished. That before living agent, now became the living instrument. If such a furious trope may stand, his special lunacy stormed his general sanity, and carried it, and turned all its concentrated cannon upon its own mad mark ; so that far from having lost his strength, Ahab, to that one end, did now possess a thousand-fold more potency than ever he had sanely brought to bear upon any one reasonable object. This is much ; yet Ahab's larger, darker, deeper part remains unhinted. But vain to popularise profundities, and all truth is profound. Winding far down from within the very heart of this spiked Hotel de Cluny where we here stand however grand and wonderful, now quit it ; and take your way, ye nobler, sadder souls, to those vast Roman halls of Thermes ; where far beneath the fantastic towers of man's upper earth, his root of grandeur, his whole awful essence sits in bearded state ; an antique buried beneath antiquities, and throned on torsoes ! So with a broken throne, the great gods mock that captive king ; so like a Caryatid, he patient sits, upholding on his frozen brow the piled entablatures of ages. Wind ye down there, ye prouder, sadder souls ! question that proud, sad king ! A family likeness ! ay, he did beget ye> ye young exiled royalties ; and from your grim sire only will the old State -secret come. 232 MOBY-DICK Now, in his heart, Ahab had some glimpse of this, namely : all my means are sane, my motive and my object mad. Yet without power to kill, or change, or shun the fact, he likewise knew that to mankind he did long dis- . semble ; in some sort, did still. But that thing of his dissembling was only subject to his perceptibility, not to his will determinate. Nevertheless, so well did he succeed in that dissembling, that when with ivory leg he stepped ashore at last, no Nantucketer thought him otherwise than but naturally grieved, and that to the quick, with the terrible casualty which had overtaken him. The report of his undeniable delirium at sea was like- wise popularly ascribed to a kindred cause. And so too, all the added moodiness which always afterward, to the very day of sailing in the Pequod on the present voyage, sat brooding on his brow. Nor is it so very unlikely, that far from distrusting his fitness for another whaling voyage, on account of such dark symptoms, the calculating people of that prudent isle were inclined to harbour the conceit, that for those very reasons he was all the better qualified and set on edge, for a pursuit so full of rage and wildness as the bloody hunt of whales. Gnawed within and scorched without, with the unfixed, unrelenting fangs of some incurable idea ; such an one, could he be found, would seem the very man to dart his iron and lift his lance against the most appalling of all brutes. Or, if for any reason thought to be corporeally incapacitated for that, yet such an one would seem superlatively competent to cheer and howl on his underlings to the attack. But be all this as it may, certain it is, that with the mad secret of his unabated rage bolted up and keyed in him, Ahab had purposely sailed upon the present voyage with the one only and all-engrossing object of hunting the White Whale. Had any one of his old acquaintances on shore MOBY-DICK 233 but half dreamed of what was lurking in him then, how soon would their aghast and righteous souls have wrenched the ship from such a fiendish man ! They were bent on profitable cruises, the profit to be counted down in dollars from the mint. He was intent on an audacious, immitigable, and supernatural revenge. Here, then, was this gray-headed, ungodly old man, chasing with curses a Job's whale round the world, at the head of a crew, too, chiefly made up of mongrel renegades, and castaways, and cannibals morally enfeebled, also, by the incompetence of mere unaided virtue or right- mindedness mStarbuck, the invulnerable jollity of indiffer- ence and recklessness in Stubb, and the pervading medioc- rity in Flask. Such a crew, so officered, seemed specially picked and packed by some infernal fatality to help Mm to his monomaniac revenge. How it was that they so aboundingly responded to the old man's ire by what evil magic their souls were possessed, that at times his hate seemed almost theirs ; the White Whale as much their insufferable foe as his ; how all this came to be- what the White Whale was to them, or how to their unconscious understandings, also, in some dim, unsus- pected way, he might have seemed the gliding great demon of the seas of life, all this to explain, would be to dive deeper than Ishmael can go. The subterranean miner that works in us all, how can one tell whither leads his shaft by the ever shifting, muffled sound of his pick ? Who does not feel the irresistible arm drag ? What skiff in tow of a seventy-four can stand still ? For one, I gave myself up to the abandonment of the time and the place ; but while yet all a-rush to encounter the whale, could see naught in that brute but the deadliest ill. CHAPTER XLII THE WHITENESS OF THE WHALE WHAT the White Whale was to Ahab has been hinted ; what, at times, he was to me, as yet remains unsaid. Aside from those more obvious considerations touching Moby-Dick, which could not but occasionally awaken in any man's soul some alarm, there was another thought, or rather vague, nameless horror concerning him, which at times by its intensity completely overpowered all the rest ; and yet so mystical and well-nigh ineffable was it, that I almost despair of putting it in a comprehensible form. It was the whiteness of the whale that above all things appalled me. But how can I hope to explain myself here ; and yet, in some dim, random way, explain myself I must, else all these chapters might be naught. Though in many natural objects, whiteness refiningly enhances beauty, as if imparting some special virtue of its own, as in marbles, japonicas, and pearls ; and though various nations have in some way recognised a certain royal pre-eminence in this hue ; even the barbaric, grand old kings of Pegu placing the title ' Lord of the White Elephants ' above all their other magniloquent ascrip- tions of dominion ; and the modern kings of Siam un- furling the same snow-white quadruped in the royal standard ; and the Hanoverian flag bearing the one figure of a snow-white charger ; and the great Austrian Empire, Caesarian, heir to overlording Rome, having for the imperial colour the same imperial hue ; and though this pre-eminence in it applies to the human race itself, giving 234 THE WHITENESS OF THE WHALE 235 the white man ideal mastership over every dusky tribe ; and though, besides all this, whiteness has been even made significant of gladness, for among the Romans a white stone marked a joyful day ; and though in other mortal sympathies and symbolisings, this same hue is made the emblem of many touching, noble things the innocence of brides, the benignity of age ; though among the Bed Men of America the giving of the white belt of wampum was the deepest pledge of honour ; though in many climes, whiteness typifies the majesty of Justice in the ermine of the Judge, and contributes to the daily state of kings and queens drawn by milk-white steeds ; though even in the higher mysteries of the most august religions it has been made the symbol of the divine spot- lessness and power ; by the Persian fire -worshippers, the white forked flame being held the holiest on the altar ; and in the Greek mythologies, Great Jove himself being made incarnate in a snow-white bull ; and though to the noble Iroquois, the mid-winter sacrifice of the sacred White Dog was by far the holiest festival of their theology, that spotless, faithful creature being held the purest envoy they could send to the Great Spirit with the annual tidings of their own fidelity ; and though directly from the Latin word for white, all Christian priests derive the name of one part of their sacred vesture, the alb or tunic, worn beneath the cassock ; and though among the holy pomps of the Romish faith, white is specially employed in the celebration of the Passion of our Lord ; though in the Vision of St. John, white robes are given to the redeemed, and the four-and-twenty elders stand clothed in white before the great white throne, and the Holy One that sitteth there white like wool ; yet for all these accumulated associations, with whatever is sweet, and honourable, and sublime, there yet lurks an elusive some- thing in the innermost idea of this hue, which strikes more ~ 236 MOBY-DICK of panic to the soul than that redness which affrights in blood. This elusive quality it is, which causes the thought of whiteness, when divorced from more kindly associations, and coupled with any object terrible in itself, to heighten that terror to the furthest bounds. Witness the white bear of the Poles, and the white shark of the Tropics ; what but their smooth, flaky whiteness makes them the transcendent horrors they are ? That ghastly whiteness it is which imparts such an abhorrent mildness, even more loathsome than terrific, to the dumb gloating of their aspect. So that not the fierce-fanged tiger in his heraldic coat can so stagger courage as the white-shrouded bear or shark. 1 Bethink thee of the albatross, whence come those clouds of spiritual wonderment and pale dread, in which that white phantom sails in all imaginations ? Not Coleridge first threw that spell ; but God's great, unflatter- ing laureate, Nature. 2 1 With reference to the Polar bear, it may possibly be urged by him who would fain go still deeper into this matter, that it is not the white- ness, separately regarded, which heightens the intolerable hideousness of that brute ; for, analysed, that heightened hideousness, it might be said, only arises from the circumstance, that the irresponsible ferociousness of the creature stands invested in the fleece of celestial innocence and love : and hence, by bringing together two such opposite emotions in our minds, the Polar bear frightens us with so unnatural a contrast. But even assuming all this to be true ; yet, were it not for the whiteness, you would not have that intensified terror. As for the white shark, the white gliding ghostliness of repose in that creature, when beheld in his ordinary moods, strangely tallies with the same quality in the Polar quadruped. This peculiarity is most vividly hit by the French in the name they bestow upon that fish. The Romish mass for the dead begins with * Requiem eternam ' (eternal rest), whence Requiem denominating the mass itself, and any other funereal music. Now, in allusion to the white, silent stillness of death in this shark, and the mild deadliness of his habits, the French call him Requin. 2 I remember the first albatross I ever saw. It was during a prolonged gale, in waters hard upon the Antarctic seas. From my forenoon watch below, I ascended to the overclouded deck ; and there, dashed upon the main hatches, I saw a regal, feathery thing of unspotted whiteness, and with a hooked, Roman bill sublime. At intervals, it arched forth its vast THE WHITENESS OF THE WHALE 237 Most famous in our Western annals and Indian tradi- tions is that of the White Steed of the Prairies ; a magnificent milk-white charger, large -eyed, small-headed, bluff-chested, and with the dignity of a thousand monarchs in his lofty, over-scorning carriage. He was the elected Xerxes of vast herds of wild horses, whose pastures in those days were only fenced by the Rocky Mountains and the Alleghanies. At their flaming head he westward trooped it like that chosen star which every evening leads on the hosts of light. The flashing cascade of his mane, the curving comet of his tail, invested him with housings more resplendent than gold and silver beaters could have furnished him. A most imperial and archangelical appari- tion of that unf alien, Western world, which to the eyes of archangel wings, as if to embrace some holy ark. Wondrous flutterings and throbbings shook it. Though bodily unharmed, it uttered cries, as some king's ghost in supernatural distress. Through its inexpressible, strange eyes, methought I peeped to secrets which took hold of God. As strange eyes, metnougnt l peeped to secrets wnicn toofc hold 01 l*od. As I Abraham before the angels, I bowed myself ; the white thing was so white, 1 its wings so wide, and in those forever exiled waters, I had lost the * miserable warping memories of traditions and of towns. Long I gazed at that prodigy of plumage. I cannot tell, can only hint, the things that darted through me then. But at last I awoke ; and turning, asked a sailor what bird was this. A goney, he replied. Goney ! I never had heard that name before ; is it conceivable that this glorious thing ia utterly unknown to men ashore ! never ! But some time after, I learned that goney was some seaman's name for albatross. So that by no possi- bility could Coleridge's wild Rhyme have had aught to do with those mystical impressions which were mine, when I saw that bird upon our deck. For neither had I then read the Rhyme, nor knew the bird to be an albatross. Yet, in saying this, I do but indirectly burnish a little brighter the noble merit of the poem and the poet. I assert, then, that in the wondrous bodily whiteness of the bird chiefly lurks the secret of the spell ; a truth the more evinced in this, that by a solecism of terms there are birds called gray albatrosses ; and these I have frequently seen, but never with such emotions as when I beheld the Antarctic fowl. But how had the mystic thing been caught? Whisper it not, and I will tell ; with a treacherous hook and line, as the fowl floated on the sea. At last the captain made a postman of it ; tying a lettered, leathern tally round its neck, with the ship's time and place ; and then letting it escape. But I doubt not, that leathern tally, meant for man, was taken off in Heaven, when the white fowl flew to join the wing-folding, the invoking, and adoring cherubim ! 238 MOBY-DICK the old trappers and hunters revived the glories of those primeval times when Adam walked majestic as a god, bluff -bo wed and fearless as this mighty steed. Whether marching amid his aides and marshals in the van of countless cohorts that endlessly streamed it over the plains, like an Ohio ; or whether with his circumambient subjects browsing all around at the horizon, the White Steed gallopingly reviewed them with warm nostrils reddening through his cool milkiness ; in whatever aspect he presented himself, always to the bravest Indians he was the object of trembling reverence and awe. Nor can it be questioned from what stands on legendary record of this noble horse, that it was his spiritual whiteness chiefly, which so clothed him with divineness ; and that this divineness had that in it which, though commanding worship, at the same time enforced a certain nameless terror. But there are other instances where this whiteness loses all that accessory and strange glory which invests it in the White Steed and Albatross. What is it that in the Albino man so peculiarly repels and often shocks the eye, as that sometimes he is loathed by his own kith and kin ! It is that whiteness which invests him, a thing expressed by the name he bears. The Albino is as well made as other men has no sub- stantive deformity and yet this mere aspect of all- pervading whiteness makes him more strangely hideous than the ugliest abortion. Why should this be so ? Nor, in quite other aspects, does Nature in her least palpable but not the less malicious agencies, fail to enlist among her forces this crowning attribute of the terrible. From its snowy aspect, the gauntleted ghost of the Southern seas has been denominated the White Squall. Nor, in some historic instances, has the art of human malice omitted so potent an auxiliary. How wildly it THE WHITENESS OF THE WHALE 239 heightens the effect of that passage in Froissart, when, masked in the snowy symbol of their faction, the desper- ate White Hoods of Ghent murder their bailiff in the market-place ! Nor, in some things, does the common, hereditary experience of all mankind fail to bear witness to the supernaturalism of this hue. It cannot well be doubted, that the one visible quality in the aspect of the dead which most appals the gazer, is the marble pallor lingering there ; as if indeed that pallor were as much like the badge of consternation in the other world, as of mortal trepidation here. And from that pallor of the dead, we borrow the expressive hue of the shroud in which we wrap them. Nor even in our superstitions do we fail to throw the same snowy mantle round our phantoms ; all ghosts rising in a milk-white fog Yea, while these terrors seize us, let us add, that even the king of terrors, when personified by the evangelist, rides on his pallid horse. Therefore, in his other moods, symbolise whatever grand or gracious thing he will by whiteness, no man can deny that in its profoundest idealised significance it calls up a peculiar apparition to the soul. But though without dissent this point be fixed, how is mortal man to account for it ? To analyse it would seem impossible. Can we, then, by the citation of some of those instances wherein this thing of whiteness though for the time either wholly or in great part stripped of all direct associations calculated to impart to it aught fearful, but, nevertheless, is found to exert over us the same sorcery, however modified ; can we thus hope to light upon some chance clue to conduct us to the hidden cause we seek ? Let us try. But in a matter like this, subtlety appeals to subtlety, and without imagination no man can follow another into these halls. And though, doubtless, some at 240 MOBY-DICK least of the imaginative impressions about to be presented may have been shared by most men, yet few perhaps were entirely conscious of them at the time, and therefore may not be able to recall them now. Why to the man of untutored ideality, who happens to be but loosely acquainted with the peculiar character of the day, does the bare mention of Whitsuntide marshal in the fancy such long, dreary, speechless processions of slow-pacing pilgrims downcast and hooded with new- fallen snow ? Or, to the unread, unsophisticated Protes- tant of the Middle American States, why does the passing mention of a White Friar or a White Nun, evoke such an eyeless statue in the soul ? Or what is there apart from the traditions of dungeoned warriors and kings (which will not wholly account for it) that makes the White Tower of London tell so much more strongly on the imagination of an untravelled American than those other storied structures, its neighbours the Byward Tower, or even the Bloody ? And those sub- limer towers, the White Mountains of New Hampshire, whence, in peculiar moods, comes that gigantic ghostli- ness over the soul at the bare mention of that name, while the thought of Virginia's Blue Ridge is full of a soft, dewy, distant dreaminess ? Or *why, irrespective of all latitudes and longitudes, does thg name of the White Sea exert such a spectralness over the fancy, while that of the Yellow Sea lulls us with mortal thoughts of long lacquered mild afternoons on the waves, followed by the gaudiest and yet sleepiest of sunsets ? Or, to choose a wholly un- substantial instance, purely addressed to the fancy, why, in reading the old fairy tales of Central Europe, does ' the tall pale man ' of the Hartz forests, whose changeless pallor unrustlingly glides through the green of the groves why is this phantom more terrible than all the whooping imps of the Blocksburg ? THE WHITENESS OF THE WHALE 241 Nor is it, altogether, the remembrance of her cathedral- toppling earthquakes ; nor the stampedoes of her frantic seas ; nor the tearlessness of arid skies that never rain ; nor the sight of her wide field of leaning spires, wrenched cope-stones, and crosses all adroop (like canted yards of anchored fleets) ; and her suburban avenues of house- walls lying over upon each other, as a tossed pack of cards ; it is not these things alone which make tearless Lima the strangest, saddest city thou canst see. For Lima has taken the white veil ; and there is a higher horror in this whiteness of her woe. Old as Pizarro, this whiteness keeps her ruins forever new ; admits not the cheerful greenness of complete decay ; spreads over her broken ramparts the rigid pallor of an apoplexy that fixes its own distortions. I know that, to the common apprehension, this phe- nomenon of whiteness is not confessed to be the prime agent in exaggerating the terror of objects otherwise terrible ; nor to the unimaginative mind is there aught of terror in those appearances whose awfulness to another mind almost solely consists in this one phenomenon, especially when exhibited under any form at all approach- ing to muteness or universality. What I mean by these two statements may perhaps be respectively elucidated by the following examples. First : The mariner, when drawing nigh the coasts of foreign lands, if by night he hear the roar of breakers, starts to vigilance, and feels just enough of trepidation to sharpen all his faculties ; but under precisely similar circumstances, let him be called from his hammock to view his ship sailing through a midnight sea of milky whiteness as if from encircling headlands shoals of combed white bears were swimming round him then he feels a silent, superstitious dread ; the shrouded phantom of the whitened waters is horrible to him as a real ghost ; VOL. I. Q 242 MOBY-DICK in vain the lead assures him he is still off soundings ; heart and helm they both go down ; he never rests till blue water is under him again. Yet where is the mariner who will tell thee, ' Sir, it was not so much the fear of striking hidden rocks, as the fear of that hideous whiteness that so stirred me ' ? Second : To the native Indian of Peru, the continual sight of the snow-howdahed Andes conveys naught of dread, except, perhaps, in the mere fancying of the eternal frosted desolateness reigning at such vast altitudes, and the natural conceit of what a fearfulness it would be to lose oneself in such inhuman solitudes. Much the same is it with the backwoodsman of the West, who with com- parative indifference views an unbounded prairie sheeted with driven snow, no shadow of tree or twig to break the fixed trance of whiteness. Not so the sailor, beholding the scenery of the Antarctic seas ; where at times, by some infernal trick of legerdemain in the powers of frost and air, he, shivering and half shipwrecked, instead of rainbows speaking hope and solace to his misery, views what seems a boundless churchyard grinning upon him with its lean ice monuments and splintered crosses. But thou sayest, methinks this white -lead chapter about whiteness is but a white flag hung out from a craven soul ; thou surrenderest to a hypo, Ishmael. Tell me, why this strong young colt, foaled in some peaceful valley of Vermont, far removed from all beasts of prey why is it that upon the sunniest day, if you but shake a fresh buffalo robe behind him, so that he cannot even see it, but only smells its wild animal muskiness why will he start, snort, and with bursting eyes paw the ground in frenzies of affright ? There is no remem- brance in him of any gorings of wild creatures in his green northern home, so that the strange muskiness he smells cannot recall to him anything associated with the experi- THE WHITENESS OP THE WHALE 243 ence of former perils ; for what knows he, this New England colt, of the black bisons of distant Oregon ? No : but here thou beholdest even in a dumb brute, I.J^A the instinct of the knowledge of the demonismjin the /* / world. Though thousands of miles from Oregon, still when he smells that savage musk, the rending, goring bison herds are as present as to the deserted wild foal of the prairies, which this instant they may be trampling into dust. Thus, then, the muffled rollings of a milky sea ; the bleak rustlings of the festooned frosts of mountains ; the desolate shiftings of the windrowed snows of prairies ; all these, to Ishmael, are as the shaking of that buffalo robe to the frightened colt ! Though neither knows where lie the nameless things of which the mystic sign gives forth such hints ; yet with s me, as with the colt, somewhere those things must exist. Though in many of its aspects this visible world seems formed in love, the invisible spheres were formed in fright. But not yet have we solved the incantation of this whiteness, and learned why it appeals with such power to the soul ; and more strange and far more portentous why, as we have seen, it is at once the most meaning symbol of spiritual things, nay, the very veil of the Christian's Deity ; and yet should be as it is, the intensi- fying agent in things the most appalling to mankind. Is it that by its indefiniteness it shadows forth the heartless voids and immensities of the universe, and thus stabs us from behind with the thought of annihilation, when beholding the white depths of the Milky Way ? Or is it, that as in essence whiteness is not so much a colour as the visible ^ absence^J_c^laar^ and at the same time the concrete of all colours ; is it for these reasons that there is such a dumb blankness, full of meaning, in a wide landscape of snows a colourless, all-colour of atheism 244 MOBY-DICK from which we shrink ? And when we consider that other theory of the natural philosophers, that all other earthly hues every stately or lovely emblazoning the sweet tinges of sunset skies and woods ; yea, and the gilded velvets of butterflies, and the butterfly cheeks of young girls ; all these are but subtle deceits, not actually in- herent in substances, but only laid on from without ; so that all deified Nature absolutely paints like the harlot, whose allurements cover nothing but the charnel-house within ; and when we proceed further, and consider that the mystical cosmetic which produces every one of her hues, the great principle of light, forever remains white or colourless in itself, and if operating without medium upon matter, would touch all objects, even tulips and roses, with its own blank tinge pondering all this, the palsied universe lies before us a leper ; and like wilful travellers in Lapland, who refuse to wear coloured and colouring glasses upon their eyes, so the wretched infidel gazes himself blind at the monumental white shroud that wraps all the prospect around him. And of all these things the Albino whale was the symbol. Wonder ye then at the fiery hunt ? CHAPTER XLIII HARK ! ' HIST ! Did you hear that noise, Cabaco ? ' It was the middle -watch : a fair moonlight ; the seamen were standing in a cordon, extending from one of the fresh-water butts in the waist, to the scuttle-butt near the taffrail. In this manner, they passed the buckets to fill the scuttle-butt. Standing, for the most part, on the hallowed precincts of the quarter-deck, they were careful not to speak or rustle their feet. From hand to hand, the buckets went in the deepest silence, only broken by the occasional flap of a sail, and the steady hum of the unceasingly advancing keel. It was in the midst of this repose, that Archy, one of the cordon, whose post was near the after-hatches, whispered to his neighbour, a Cholo, the words above. ' Hist ! did you hear that noise, Cabaco ? ' ' Take the bucket, will ye, Archy ? what noise d' ye mean ? ' ' There it is again under the hatches don't you hear it ? a cough it sounded like a cough.' ' Cough be damned ! Pass along that return bucket.' ' There again there it is ! it sounds like two or three sleepers turning over, now ! ' ' Caramba ! have done, shipmate, will ye ? It 's the three soaked biscuits ye eat for supper turning over inside of ye -nothing else. Look to the bucket ! ' 4 Say what ye will, shipmate ; I 've sharp ears.' ' Ay, you are the chap, ain't ye, that heard the hum 245 246 MOBY-DICK of the old Quakeress's knitting-needles fifty miles at sea from Nantucket ; you 're the chap.' ' Grin away ; we '11 see what turns up. Hark ye, Cabaco, there is somebody down in the after-hold that has not yet been seen on deck ; and I suspect our old Mogul knows something of it too. I heard Stubb tell Flask, one morning-watch, that there was something of that sort in the wind.' ' Tish ! the bucket ! ' CHAPTER XLIV THE CHART HAD you followed Captain Ahab down into his cabin after the squall that took place on the night succeeding that wild ratification of his purpose with his crew, you would have seen him go to a locker in the transom, and bringing out a large wrinkled roll of yellowish sea-charts, spread them before him on his screwed-down table. Then seating himself before it, you would have seen him intently study the various lines and shadings which there met his eye ; and with slow but steady pencil trace additional courses over spaces that before were blank. At intervals, he would refer to piles of old log-books beside him, wherein were set down the seasons and places in which, on various former voyages of various ships, sperm whales had been captured or seen. While thus employed, the heavy pewter lamp suspended foi chains over his head, continually rocked with the motion of the ship, and forever threw shifting gleams and shadows of lines upon his wrinkled brow, till it almost seemed that while he himself was marking out lines and courses on the wrinkled charts, some invisible pencil was also tracing lines and courses upon the deeply marked chart of his forehead. But it was not this night in particular that, in the solitude of his cabin, Ahab thus pondered over his charts. Almost every night they were brought out ; almost every night some pencil marks were effaced, and others were substituted. For with the charts of all four oceans before 247 248 MOBY-DICK him, Ahab was threading a maze of currents and eddies, with a view to the more certain accomplishment of that monomaniac thought of his soul. Now, to anyone not fully acquainted with the ways of the leviathans, it might seem an absurdly hopeless task thus to seek out one solitary creature in the unhooped oceans of this planet. But not so did it seem to Ahab, who knew the sets of all tides and currents ; and thereby calculating the drif tings of the sperm whale's food ; and, also, calling to mind the regular, ascertained seasons for hunting him in particular latitudes ; could arrive at reasonable surmises, almost approaching to certainties, concerning the timeliest day to be upon this or that ground in search of his prey. So assured, indeed, is the fact concerning the periodical- ness of the sperm whale's resorting to given waters, that many hunters believe that, could he be closely observed and studied throughout the world ; were the logs for one voyage of the entire whale -fleet carefully collated, then the migrations of the sperm whale would be found to correspond in invariability to those of the herring -shoals or the flights of swallows. On this hint, attempts have been made to construct elaborate migratory charts of the sperm whale. 1 Besides, when making a passage from one feeding- ground to another, the sperm whales, guided by some infallible instinct say, rather, secret intelligence from 1 Since the above was written, the statement is happily borne out by an official circular, issued by Lieutenant Maury, of the National Observatory, Washington, April 16th, 1851. By that circular, it appears that precisely such a chart is in course of completion ; and portions of it are presented in the circular. ' This chart divides the ocean into districts of five degrees of latitude by five degrees of longitude ; perpendicularly through each of which districts are twelve columns for the twelve months ; and hori- zontally through each of which districts are three lines ; one to show the number of days that have been spent in each month in every district, and the two others to show the number of days in which whales, sperm or right, have been seen.' THE CHART 249 the Deity mostly swim in veins, as they are called ; con- tinuing their way along a given ocean-line with such undeviating exactitude, that no ship ever sailed her course, by any chart, with one tithe of such marvellous precision. Though, in these cases, the direction taken by any one whale be straight as a surveyor's parallel, and though the line of advance be strictly confined to its own unavoidable, straight wake, yet the arbitrary vein in which at these times he is said to swim, generally embraces some few miles in width (more or less, as the vein is presumed to expand or contract) ; but never exceeds the visual sweep from the whale-ship's mast- heads, when circumspectly gliding along this magic zone. The sum is, that at particular seasons within that breadth and along that path, migrating whales may with great confidence be looked for. And hence not only at substantiated times, upon well- known separate feeding-grounds, could Ahab hope to encounter his prey ; but in crossing the widest expanses of water between those grounds he could, by his art, so place and time himself on his way, as even then not to be wholly without prospect of a meeting. There was a circumstance which at first sight seemed to entangle his delirious but still methodical scheme. But not so in reality, perhaps. Though the gregarious sperm whales have their regular seasons for particular grounds, yet in general you cannot conclude that the herds which haunted such and such a latitude or longitude this year, say, will turn out to be identically the same with those that were found there the preceding season ; though there are peculiar and unquestionable instances where the contrary of this has proved true. In general, the same remark, only within a less wide limit, applies to the soli- taries and hermits among the matured, aged sperm whales. So that though Moby-Dick had in a former year been seen, 250 MOBY-DICK for example, on what is called the Seychelle ground in the Indian Ocean, or Volcano Bay on the Japanese coast ; yet it did not follow, that were the Pequod to visit either of those spots at any subsequent corresponding season, she would infallibly encounter him there. So, too, with some other feeding -grounds, where he had at times revealed himself. But all these seemed only his casual stopping-places and ocean-inns, so to speak, not his places of prolonged abode. And where Ahab's chances of accomplishing his object have hitherto been spoken of, allusion has only been made to whatever wayside, ante- cedent, extra prospects were his, ere a particular set time or place were attained, when all possibilities would become probabilities, and, as Ahab fondly thought, every possi- bility the next thing to a certainty. That particular set time and place were conjoined in the one technical phrase the Season-on-the-Line. For there and then, for several consecutive years, Moby-Dick had been periodic- ally descried, lingering in those waters for a while, as the sun, in its annual round, loiters for a predicted interval in any one sign of the Zodiac. There it was, too, that most of the deadly encounters with the White Whale had taken place ; there the waves were storied with his deeds ; there also was that tragic spot where the monomaniac old man had found the awful motive to his vengeance. But in the cautious comprehensiveness and unloitering vigi- lance with which Ahab threw his brooding soul into this unfaltering hunt, he would not permit himself to rest all his hopes upon the one crowning fact above mentioned, however flattering it might be to those hopes ; nor in the sleeplessness of his vow could he so tranquillise his unquiet heart as to postpone all intervening quest. Now, the Pequod had sailed from Nantucket at the very beginning of the Season-on-the-Line. No possible en- deavour then could enable her commander to make the THE CHART 251 great passage southward, double Cape Horn, and then running down sixty degrees of latitude arrive in the equatorial Pacific in time to cruise there. Therefore, he must wait for the next ensuing season. Yet the prema- ture hour of the Pequod's sailing had, perhaps, been correctly selected by Ahab, with a view to this very com- plexion of things. Because, an interval of three hundred and sixty-five days and nights was before him ; an inter- val which, instead of impatiently enduring ashore, he would spend in a miscellaneous hunt ; if by chance the White Whale, spending his vacation in seas far remote from his periodical feeding-grounds, should turn up his wrinkled brow off the Persian Gulf, or in the Bengal Bay, or China Seas, or in any other waters haunted by his race. So that Monsoons, Pampas, Nor'-Westers, Harmattans, Trades ; any wind but the Levanter and Simoom, might blow Moby-Dick into the devious zig-zag world-circle of the Pequod's circumnavigating wake. But granting all this ; yet, regarded discreetly and coolly, seems it not but a mad idea, this ; that in the broad boundless ocean, one solitary whale, even if encountered, should be thought capable of individual recognition from his hunter, even as a white-bearded Mufti in the thronged thoroughfares of Constantinople ? Yes. For the peculiar snow-white brow of Moby-Dick, and his snow-white hump, could not but be unmistakable. And have I not tallied the whale, Ahab would mutter to himself, as after poring over his charts till long after midnight he would throw himself back in reveries tallied him, and shall he escape ? His broad fins are bored, and scalloped out like a lost sheep's ear ! And here, his mad mind would run on in a breathless race ; till a weariness and faintness of ponder- ing came over him ; and in the open air of the deck he would seek to recover his strength. Ah, God ! what trances of torments does that man endure who is consumed 252 MOBY-DICK with one unachieved revengeful desire. He sleeps with clenched hands ; and wakes with his own bloody nails in his palms. Often, when forced from his hammock by exhausting and intolerably vivid dreams of the night, which, resuming his own intense thoughts through the day, carried them on amid a clashing of frenzies, and whirled them round and round in his blazing brain, till the very throbbing of his life-spot became insufferable anguish ; and when, was sometimes the case, these spiritual throes in him heaved his being up from its base, and a chasm seemed opening in him, from which forked flames and lightnings shot up, and accursed fiends beckoned him to leap down among them ; when this hell in himself yawned beneath him, a wild cry would be heard through the ship ; and with glaring eyes Ahab would burst from his state-room, as though escaping from a bed that was on fire. Yet these, perhaps, instead of being the unsuppressible symptoms of some latent weakness, or fright at his own resolve, were but the plainest tokens of its intensity. For, at such times, crazy Ahab, the scheming, unappeasedly steadfast hunter of the White Whale ; this Ahab that had gone to his hammock, was not the agent that so caused him to burst from it in horror again. The latter was the eternal, living principle or soul in him ; and in sleep, being for the time dissociated from the characterising mind, which at other times employed it for its outer vehicle or agent, it spontaneously sought escape from the scorching contiguity of the frantic thing, of which, for the time, it was no longer an integral. But as the mind does not exist unless leagued with the soul, therefore it must have been that, in Ahab's case, yielding up all his thoughts and fancies to his one supreme purpose ; that purpose, by its own sheer inveteracy of will, forced itself against gods and devils into a kind of self-assumed, independent being THE CHART 253 of its own. Nay, could grimly live and burn, while the common vitality to which it was conjoined, fled horror- stricken from the unbidden and unfathered birth. There- fore, the tormented spirit that glared out of bodily eyes, when what seemed Ahab rushed from his room, was for the time but a vacated thing, a formless somnambulistic being, a ray of living light, to be sure, but without an object to colour, and therefore a blankness in itself. God help thee, old man, thy thoughts have created a creature in thee ; and he whose intense thinking thus makes him a Prometheus ; a vulture feeds upon that heart forever ; that vulture the very creature he creates. CHAPTER XLV THE AFFIDAVIT So far as what there may be of a narrative in this book ; and, indeed, as indirectly touching one or two very inter- esting and curious particulars in the habits of sperm whales, the foregoing chapter, in its earlier part, is as important a one as will be found in this volume ; but the leading matter of it requires to be still further and more familiarly enlarged upon, in order to be adequately understood, and moreover to take away any incredulity which a profound ignorance of the entire subject may induce in some minds, as to the natural verity of the main points of this affair. I care not to perform this part of my task methodically ; but shall be content to produce the desired impression by separate citations of items, practically or reliably known to me as a whaleman ; and from these citations, I take it, the conclusion aimed at will naturally follow of itself. First : I have personally known three instances where a whale, after receiving a harpoon, has effected a complete escape ; and, after an interval (in one instance of three years), has been again struck by the same hand, and slain ; when the two irons, both marked by the same private cipher, have been taken from the body. In the instance where three years intervened between the flinging of the two harpoons ; and I think it may have been something more than that ; the man who darted them happening, in the interval, to go in a trading-ship on a voyage to Africa, went ashore there, joined a discovery party, and 254 THE AFFIDAVIT 255 penetrated far into the interior, where he travelled for a period of nearly two years, often endangered by serpents, savages, tigers, poisonous miasmas, with all the other common perils incident to wandering in the heart of un- known regions. Meanwhile, the whale he had struck must also have been on its travels ; no doubt it had thrice circumnavigated the globe, brushing with its flanks all the coasts of Africa ; but to no purpose. This man and this whale again came together, and the one vanquished the other. I say I, myself, have known three instances similar to this ; that is in two of them I saw the whales struck ; and, upon the second attack, saw the two irons with the respective marks cut in them, afterward taken from the dead fish. In the three-year instance, it so fell out that I was in the boat both times, first and last, and the last time distinctly recognised a peculiar sort of huge mole under the whale's eye, which I had observed there three years previous. I say three years, but I am pretty sure it was more than that. Here are three instances, then, which I personally know the truth of ; but I have heard of many other instances from persons whose veracity in the matter there is no good ground to impeach. Secondly : It is well known in the sperm whale fishery, however ignorant the world ashore maybe of it, that there have been several memorable historical instances where a particular whale in the ocean has been at distant times and places popularly cognisable. Why such a whale became thus marked was not altogether arid originally owing to his bodily peculiarities as distinguished from other whales ; for however peculiar in that respect any chance whale may be, they soon put an end to his peculi- arities by killing him, and boiling him down into a peculi- arly valuable oil. No : the reason was this : that from the fatal experiences of the fishery there hung a terrible prestige of perilousness about such a whale as there did 256 MOBY-DICK about Rinaldo Rinaldini, insomuch that most fishermen were content to recognise him by merely touching their tarpaulins when he would be discovered lounging by them on the sea, without seeking to cultivate a more intimate acquaintance. Like some poor devils ashore that happen to know an irascible great man, they make distant unob- trusive salutations to him in the street, lest if they pursued the acquaintance further, they might receive a summary thump for their presumption. But not only did each of these famous whales enjoy great individual celebrity nay, you may call it an ocean- wide renown ; not only was he famous in life and now is immortal in forecastle stories after death, but he was admitted into all the rights, privileges, and distinctions of a name ; had as much a name indeed as Cambyses or Caesar. Was it not so, O Timor Tom ! thou famed leviathan, scarred like an iceberg, who so long didst lurk in the oriental straits of that name, whose spout was oft seen from the palmy beach of Ombay ? Was it not so, New Zealand Jack ! thou terror of all cruisers that crossed their wakes in the vicinity of the Tattoo Land? Was it not so, Morquan ! King of Japan, whose lofty jet they say at times assumed the semblance of a snow- white cross against the sky ? Was it not so, Don Miguel ! thou Chilian whale, marked like an old tortoise with mystic hieroglyphics upon the back I In plain prose, here are four whales as well known to the students of Cetacean History as Marius or Sylla to the classic scholar. But this is not all. New Zealand Tom and Don Miguel, after at various times creating great havoc among the boats of different vessels, were finally gone in quest of, systematically hunted out, chased and killed by valiant whaling-captains, who heaved up their anchors with that express object as much in view, as in setting out through the Narragansett Woods, Captain Butler of old had it THE AFFIDAVIT 257 in his mind to capture that notorious murderous savage Annawon, the headmost warrior of the Indian King Philip. I do not know where I can find a better place than just here, to make mention of one or two other things, which to me seem important, as in printed form establishing in all respects the reasonableness of the whole story of the White Whale, more especially the catastrophe. For this is one of those disheartening instances where truth requires full as much bolstering as error. So ignorant are most landsmen of some of the plainest and most palpable wonders of the world, that without some hints touching the plain facts, historical and otherwise, of the fishery, they might scout at Moby-Dick as a monstrous fable, or still worse and more detestable, a hideous and intolerable allegory. First : Though most men have some vague flitting ideas of the general perils of the grand fishery, yet they have nothing like a fixed, vivid conception of those perils, and the frequency with which they recur. One reason perhaps is, that not one in fifty of the actual disasters and deaths by casualties in the fishery, ever finds a public record at home, however transient and immediately forgotten that record. Do you suppose that that poor fellow there, who this moment perhaps caught by the whale-line off the coast of New Guinea, is being carried down to the bottom of the sea by the sounding leviathan do you suppose that that poor fellow's name will appear in the newspaper obituary you will read to-morrow at your breakfast ? No : because the mails are very irregular between here and New Guinea. In fact, did you ever hear what might be called regular news direct or indirect from New Guinea ? Yet I tell you that upon one particular voyage which I made to the Pacific, among many others we spoke thirty different ships, every VOL. j. B 258 MOBY-DICK one of which had had a death by a whale, some of them more than one, and three that had each lost a boat's crew. For God's sake, be economical with your lamps and candles ! not a gallon you burn, but at least one drop of man's blood was spilled for it. Secondly : People ashore have indeed some indefinite idea that a whale is an enormous creature of enormous power ; but I have ever found that when narrating to them some specific example of this twofold enormousness, they have significantly complimented me upon my facetiousness ; when, I declare upon my soul, I had no more idea of being facetious than Moses, when he wrote the history of the plagues of Egypt. But fortunately the special point I here seek can be established upon testimony entirely independent of my own. That point is this : The sperm whale is in some cases sufficiently powerful, knowing, and judiciously malicious, as with direct aforethought to stave in, utterly destroy, and sink a large ship ; and what is more, the sperm whale has done it. First : In the year 1820 the ship Essex, Captain Pollard, of Nantucket, was cruising in the Pacific Ocean. One day she saw spouts, lowered her boats, and gave chase to a shoal of sperm whales. Ere long, several of the whales were wounded ; when, suddenly, a very large whale escaping from the boats, issued from the shoal, and bore directly down upon the ship. Dashing his forehead against her hull, he so stove her in, that in less than ' ten minutes ' she settled down and fell over. Not a surviving plank of her has been seen since. After the severest exposure, part of the crew reached the land in their boats. Being returned home at last, Captain Pollard once more sailed for the Pacific in command of another ship, but the gods shipwrecked him again upon unknown rocks and breakers ; for the second time his THE AFFIDAVIT 259 ship was utterly lost, and forthwith forswearing the sea, he has never tempted it since. At this day Captain Pollard is a resident of Nantucket. I have seen Owen Chace, who was chief mate of the Essex at the time of the tragedy ; I have read his plain and faithful narrative ; I have conversed with his son ; and all this within a few miles of the scene of the catastrophe. 1 Secondly : The ship Union, also of Nantucket, was in the year 1 807 totally lost off the Azores by a similar onset, but the authentic particulars of this catastrophe I have never chanced to encounter, though from the whale- hunters I have now and then heard casual allusions to it. Thirdly : Some eighteen or twenty years ago Commo- dore J , then commanding an American sloop -of -war of the first class, happened to be dining with a party of whaling-captains, on board a Nantucket ship in the 1 The following are extracts from Chace's narrative : ' Every fact seemed to warrant me in concluding that it was anything but chance which directed his operations ; he made two several attacks upon the ship, at a short interval between them, both of which, according to their direction, were calculated to do us the most injury, by being made ahead, and thereby combining the speed of the two objects for the shook ; to effect which, the exact manoeuvres which he made were necessary. His aspect was most horrible, and such as indicated resentment and fury. He came directly from the shoal which we had just before entered, and in which we had struck three of his companions, as if fired with revenge for their sufferings.' Again : ' At all events, the whole circumstances taken together, all happening before my own eyes, and producing, at the time, impressions in my mind of decided, calculating mischief, on the part of the whale (many of which impressions I cannot now recall), induce me to be satisfied that I am correct in my opinion.' Here are his reflections some time after quitting the ship, during a black night in an open boat, when almost despairing of reaching any hospitable shore. ' The dark ocean and swelling waters were nothing ; the fears of being swallowed up by some dreadful tempest, or dashed upon hidden rocks, with all the other ordinary subjects of fearful con- templation, seemed scarcely entitled to a moment's thought ; the dismal- looking wreck, and the horrid aspect and revenge of the whale, wholly engrossed my reflections until day again made its appearance.' In another place p. 45, he speaks of ' the mysterious and mortal attack of the animal.' 260 MOBY-DICK harbour of Oahu, Sandwich Islands. Conversation turn- ing upon whales, the commodore was pleased to be scepti- cal touching the amazing strength ascribed to them by the professional gentlemen present. He peremptorily denied, for example, that any whale could so smite his stout sloop- of-war as to cause her to leak so much as a thimbleful. Very good ; but there is more coming. Some weeks after, the commodore set sail in this impregnable craft for Valparaiso. But he was stopped on the way by a portly sperm whale, that begged a few moments' confidential business with him. That business consisted in fetching the commodore's craft such a thwack, that with all his pumps going he made straight for the nearest port to heave down and repair. I am not superstitious, but I consider the commodore's interview with that whale as providential. Was not Saul of Tarsus converted from unbelief by a similar fright ? I tell you, the sperm whale will stand no nonsense. I will now refer you to Langsdorff 's Voyages for a little circumstance in point, peculiarly interesting to the writer hereof. Langsdorff, you must know by the way, was attached to the Russian Admiral Krusenstern's famous Dis- co very Expedition in the beginning of the present century. Captain Langsdorff thus begins his seventeenth chapter. 4 By the thirteenth of May our ship was ready to sail, and the next day we were out in the open sea, on our way to Ochotsh. The weather was very clear and fine, but so intolerably cold that we were obliged to keep on our fur clothing. For some days we had very little wind ; it was not till the nineteenth that a brisk gale from the north-west sprang up. An uncommon large whale, the body of which was larger than the ship itself, lay almost at the surface of the water, but was not perceived by any- one on board till the moment when the ship, which was in full sail, was almost upon him, so that it was impossible THE AFFIDAVIT 261 to prevent its striking against him. We were thus placed in the most imminent danger, as this gigantic creature, setting up its back, raised the ship three feet at least out of the water. The masts reeled, and the sails fell alto- gether, while we who were below all sprang instantly upon the deck, concluding that we had struck upon some rock ; instead of this we saw the monster sailing off with the utmost gravity and solemnity. Captain D'Wolf applied immediately to the pumps to examine whether or not the vessel had received any damage from the shock, but we found that very happily it had escaped entirely uninjured.' Now, the Captain D'Wolf here alluded to as command- ing the ship in question, is a New Englander, who, after a long life of unusual adventures as a sea-captain, this day resides in the village of Dorchester near Boston. I have the honour of being a nephew of his. I have par- ticularly questioned him concerning this passage in Langs- dorfL He substantiates every word. The ship, however, was by no means a large one : a Russian craft built on the Siberian coast, and purchased by my uncle after bartering away the vessel in which he sailed from home. In that up and down manly book of old-fashioned adventure, so full, too, of honest wonders the voyage of Lionel Wafer, one of ancient Dampier's old chums I found a little matter set down so like that just quoted from Langsdorff, that I cannot forbear inserting it here for a corroborative example, if such be needed. Lionel, it seems, was on his way to ' John Ferdi- nando,' as he calls the modern Juan Fernandez. ' In our way thither,' he says, 'about four o'clock in the morning, when we were about one hundred and fifty leagues from the Main of America, our ship felt a terrible shock, which put our men in such consternation that they could hardly tell where they were or what to think ; but 262 MOBY-DICK everyone began to prepare for death. And, indeed, the shock was so sudden and violent, that we took it for granted the ship had struck against a rock ; but when the amaze- ment was a little over, we cast the lead, and sounded, but found no ground. * * * The suddenness of the shock made the guns leap in their carriages, and several of the men were shaken out of their hammocks. Captain Davis, who lay with his head on a gun, was thrown out of his cabin ! ' Lionel then goes on to impute the shock to an earthquake, and seems to substantiate the imputa- tion by stating that a great earthquake, somewhere about that time,, did actually do great mischief along the Spanish land. But I should not much wonder if, in the darkness of that early hour of the morning, the shock was after all caused by an unseen whale vertically bumping the hull from beneath. I might proceed with several more examples, one way or another known to me, of the great power and malice at times of the sperm whale. In more than one instance, he has been known, not only to chase the assailing boats back to their ships, but to pursue the ship itself, and long withstand all the lances hurled at him from its decks. The English ship Pusie Hall can tell a story on that head ; and, as for his strength, let me say, that there have been examples where the lines attached to a running sperm whale have, in a calm, been transferred to the ship, and secured there ; the whale towing her great hull through the water, as a horse walks off with a cart. Again, it is very often observed that, if the sperm whale, once struck, is allowed time to rally, he then acts, not so often with blind rage, as with wilful, deliberate designs of destruction to his pursuers ; nor is it without conveying some elo- quent indication of his character, that upon being attacked he will frequently open his mouth, and retain it in that dread expansion for several consecutive minutes. But I THE AFFIDAVIT 263 must be content with only one more and a concluding illustration ; a remarkable and most significant one, by which you will not fail to see, that not only is the most marvellous event in this book corroborated by plain facts of the present day, but that these marvels (like all marvels) are mere repetitions of the ages ; so that for the millionth time we say amen with Solomon Verily there is nothing new under the sun. In the sixth Christian century lived Procopius, a Chris- tian magistrate of Constantinople, in the days when Justinian was Emperor and Belisarius general. As many know, he wrote the history of his own times, a work every way of uncommon value. By the best authorities, he has always been considered a most trustworthy and un- exaggerating historian, except in some one or two par- ticulars, not at all affecting the matter presently to be mentioned. Now, in this history of his, Procopius mentions that, during the term of his prefecture at Constantinople, a great sea-monster was captured in the neighbouring Propontis, or Sea of Marmora, after having destroyed vessels at intervals in those waters for a period of more than fifty years. A fact thus set down in substantial history cannot easily be gainsaid. Nor is there any reason it should be. Of what precise species this sea- monster was, is not mentioned. But as he destroyed ships, as well as for other reasons, he must have been a whale ; and I am strongly inclined to think a sperm whale. And I will tell you why. For a long time I fancied that the sperm whale had been always unknown in the Medi- terranean and the deep waters connecting with it. Even now I am certain that those seas are not, and perhaps never can be, in the present constitution of things, a place for his habitual gregarious resort. But further investi- gations have recently proved to me, that in modern times 264 MOBY-DICK there have been isolated instances of the presence of the sperm whale in the Mediterranean. I am told, on good authority, that on the Barbary coast, a Commodore Davis of the British navy found the skeleton of a sperm whale. Now, as a vessel of war readily passes through the Dardanelles, hence a sperm whale could, by the same route, pass out of the Mediterranean into the Propontis. In the Propontis, as far as I can learn, none of that peculiar substance called brit is to be found, the aliment of the right whale. But I have every reason to believe that the food of the sperm whale squid or cuttle-fish lurks at the bottom of that sea, because large creatures, but by no means the largest of that sort, have been found at its surface. If, then, you properly put these statements together, and reason upon them a bit, you will clearly perceive that, according to all human reasoning, Pro- copius's sea-monster, that for half a century stove the ships of a Roman Emperor, must in all probability have been a sperm whale. CHAPTER XLVI SURMISES THOUGH, consumed with the hot fire of his purpose, Ahab in all his thoughts and actions ever had in view the ultimate capture of Moby-Dick ; though he seemed ready to sacrifice all mortal interests to that one passion ; never- theless it may have been that he was by nature and long habituation far too wedded to a fiery whaleman's ways, altogether to abandon the collateral prosecution of the voyage. Or at least if this were otherwise, there were not wanting other motives much more influential with him. It would be refining too much, perhaps, even con- sidering his monomania, to hint that his vindictiveness toward the White Whale might have possibly extended itself in some degree to all sperm whales, and that the more monsters he slew, by so much the more he multiplied the chances that each subsequently encountered whale would prove to be the hated one he hunted. But if such an hypothesis be indeed exceptionable, there were still additional considerations which, though not so strictly according with the wildness of his ruling passion, yet were by no means incapable of swaying him. To accomplish his object Ahab must use tools ; and of all tools used in the shadow of the moon, men are most apt to get out of order. He knew, for example, that however magnetic his ascendency in some respects was over Starbuck, yet that ascendency did not cover the complete spiritual man any more than mere corporeal superiority involves intellectual mastership ; for to the 265 266 MOBY-DICK purely spiritual, the intellectual but stand in a sort of corporeal relation. Starbuck's body and Starbuck's coerced will were Ahab's, so long as Ahab kept his magnet at Starbuck's brain ; still he knew that for all this the chief mate, in his soul, abhorred his captain's quest, and could he, would joyfully disintegrate himself from it, or even frustrate it. It might be that a long interval would elapse ere the White Whale was seen. During that long interval Starbuck would ever be apt to fall into open relapses of rebellion against his captain's leadership, unless some ordinary, prudential, circumstantial influ- ences were brought to bear upon him. Not only that, but the subtle insanity of Ahab respecting Moby-Dick was no ways more significantly manifested than in his superlative sense and shrewdness in foreseeing that, for the present, the hunt should in some way be stripped of that strange imaginative impiousness which naturally invested it ; that the full terror of the voyage must be kept withdrawn into the obscure background (for few men's courage is proof against protracted meditation unrelieved by action) ; that when they stood their long night-watches, his officers and men must have some nearer things to think of than Moby-Dick. For however eagerly and impetuously the savage crew had hailed the announce- ment of his quest ; yet all sailors of all sorts are more or less capricious and unreliable they live in the varying outer weather, and they inhale its fickleness and when retained for any object remote and blank in the pursuit, however promissory of life and passion in the end, it is above all things requisite that temporary interests and employments should intervene and hold them healthily suspended for the final dash. Nor was Ahab unmindful of another thing. In times of strong emotion mankind disdain all base considerations ; but such times are evanescent. The permanent con- SURMISES 267 stitutional condition of the manufactured man, thought Ahab, is sordidness. Granting that the White Whale fully incites the hearts of this my savage crew, and playing round their savageness even breeds a certain generous knight -errant ism in them, still, while for the love of it they give chase to Moby-Dick, they must also have food for their more common, daily appetites. For even the high lifted and chivalric Crusaders of old times were not content to traverse two thousand miles of land to fight for their holy sepulchre, without committing burglaries, picking pockets, and gaining other pious perquisites by the way. Had they been strictly held to their one final and romantic object that final and romantic object, too many would have turned from in disgust. I will not strip these men, thought Ahab, of all hopes of cash ay, cash. They may scorn cash now ; but let some months go by, and no perspective promise of it to them, and then \ this same quiescent cash all at once mutinying in them, this same cash would soon cashier Ahab. Nor was there wanting still another precautionary motive more related to Ahab personally. Having im- pulsively, it is probable, and perhaps somewhat pre- maturely revealed the prime but private purpose of the Pequod's voyage, Ahab was now entirely conscious that, in so doing, he had indirectly laid himself open to the unanswerable charge of usurpation ; and with perfect impunity, both moral and legal, his crew if so disposed, and to that end competent, could refuse all further obedience to him, and even violently wrest from him the command. From even the barely hinted imputation of usurpation, and the possible consequences of such a suppressed impression gaining ground, Ahab must of course have been most anxious to protect himself. That protection could only consist in his own predominating brain and heart and hand, backed by a heedful, closely 268 MOBY-DICK calculating attention to every minute atmospheric influ- ence which it was possible for his crew to be subjected to. For all these reasons then, and others perhaps too analytic to be verbally developed here, Ahab plainly saw that he must still in a good degree continue true to the natural, nominal purpose of the Pequod's voyage ; observe all customary usages ; and not only that, but force himself to evince all his well-known passionate interest in the general pursuit of his profession. Be all this as it may, his voice was now often heard hailing the three mast-heads and admonishing them to keep a bright look-out, and not omit reporting even a porpoise. This vigilance was not long without reward. CHAPTER XLVII THE MAT-MAKER IT was a cloudy, sultry afternoon ; the seamen were lazily lounging about the decks, or vacantly gazing over into the lead-coloured waters. Queequeg and I were mildly employed weaving what is called a sword-mat, for an additional lashing to our boat. So still and subdued and yet somehow preluding was all the scene, and such an incantation of revelry lurked in the air, that each silent sailor seemed resolved into his own invisible self. I was the attendant or page of Queequeg, while busy at the mat. As I kept passing and repassing the filling or woof of marline between the long yarns of the warp, using my own hand for the shuttle, and as Queequeg, standing sideways, ever and anon slid his heavy oaken sword between the threads, and idly looking off upon the water, carelessly and unthinkingly drove home every yarn : I say so strange a dreaminess did there then reign all over the ship and all over the sea, only broken by the intermitting dull sound of the sword, that it seemed as if this were the Loom of Time, and I myself were a shuttle mechanically weaving and weaving away at the Fates. There lay the fixed threads of the warp subject to but one single, ever returning, unchanging vibration, and that vibration merely enough to admit of the crosswise inter- blending of other threads with its own. This warp seemed necessity ; and here, thought I, with my own hand I ply my own shuttle and weave my own destiny into these 269 270 MOBY-DICK unalterable threads. Meantime, Queequeg's impulsive, indifferent sword, sometimes hitting the woof slantingly, or crookedly, or strongly, or weakly, as the case might be ; and by this difference in the concluding blow pro- ducing a corresponding contrast in the final aspect of the completed fabric ; this savage's sword, thought I, which thus finally shapes and fashions both warp and woof ; this easy, indifferent sword must be chance ay, chance, free will, and necessity no wise incompatible all inter- weavingly working together. The straight warp of neces- sity, not to be swerved from its ultimate course its every / alternating vibration, indeed, only tending to that ; free will still free to ply her shuttle between given threads ; and chance, though restrained in its play within the right lines of necessity, and sideways in its motions directed by free will, though thus prescribed to by both, chance by turns rules either, and has the last featuring blow at events. ******* Thus we were weaving and weaving away when I I started at a soundjgq strange, long drawn, and musically I wild and unearthly, that the ball of free will dropped from my hand, and I stood gazing up at the clouds whence that voice dropped like a wing. High aloft in the cross-trees was that mad Gay-Header, Tashtego. His body was reaching eagerly forward, his hand stretched out like a wand, and at brief sudden intervals he continued his cries. To be sure, the same sound was that very moment perhaps being heard all over the seas, from hundreds of whale- men's look-outs perched as high in the air ; but from few of those lungs could that accustomed old cry have derived such a marvellous cadence as from Tashtego the Indian's. As he stood hovering over you half suspended in air, so wildly and eagerly peering toward the horizon, you THE MAT-MAKER 271 would have thought him some prophet or seer beholding the shadows of Fate, and by those wild cries announcing their coming. ' There she blows ! there ! there ! there ! she blows ! she blows ! ' 4 Where away ? ' ' On the lee-beam, about two miles off ! a school of them ! ' Instantly all was commotion. The sperm whale blows as a clock ticks, with the same undeviating and reliable uniformity. And thereby whalemen distinguish this fish from other tribes of his genus. ' There go flukes ! ' was now the cry from Tashtego ; and the whales disappeared. 4 Quick, steward ! ' cried Ahab. ' Time ! time ! ' Dough-Boy hurried below, glanced at the watch, and reported the exact minute to Ahab. The ship was now kept away from the wind, and she went gently rolling before it. Tashtego reporting that the whales had gone down heading to leeward, we con- fidently looked to see them again directly in advance of our bows. For that singular craft at times evinced by the sperm whale when, sounding with his head in one direction, he nevertheless, while concealed beneath the surface, mills round, and swiftly swims off in the opposite quarter this deceitfulness of his could not now be in action ; for there was no reason to suppose that the fish seen by Tashtego had been in any way alarmed, or indeed knew at all of our vicinity. One of the men selected for ship-keepers that is, those not appointed to the boats by this time relieved the Indian at the mainmast-head. The sailors at the fore and mizen had come down ; the line-tubs were fixed in their places ; the cranes were thrust out ; the main-yard was backed, and the three 272 MOBY-DICK boats swung over the sea like three samphire baskets over high cliffs. Outside of the bulwarks their eager crews with one hand clung to the rail, while one foot was expectantly poised on the gunwale. So look the long line of man-of- war's men about to throw themselves on board an enemy's ship. But at this critical instant a sudden exclamation was heard that took every eye from the whale. With a start all glared at dark Ahab, who was surrounded by five dusky phantoms that seemed fresh formed out of air. CHAPTER XLVIII THE FIRST LOWERING THE phantoms, for so they then seemed, were flitting on the other side of the deck, and, with a noiseless celerity, were casting loose the tackles and bands of the boat which swung there. This boat had always been deemed one of the spare boats, though technically called the captain's, on account of its hanging from the starboard quarter. The figure that now stood by its bows was tall and swart, with one white tooth evilly protruding from its steel-like lips. A rumpled Chinese jacket of black cotton funereally invested him, with wide black trowsers of the same dark stuff. But strangely crowning this ebonness was a glistening white plaited turban, the living hair braided and coiled round and round upon his head. Less swart in aspect, the companions of this figure were of that vivid, tiger-yellow complexion peculiar to some of the aboriginal natives of the Manillas ; a race notorious for a certain diabolism of subtlety, and by some honest white mariners supposed to be the paid spies and secret confidential agents on the water of the devil, their lord, whose counting- room they suppose to be elsewhere. While yet the wondering ship's company were gazing upon these strangers, Ahab cried out to the white-turbaned old man at their head, ' All ready there, Fedallah ? ' ' Ready,' was the half -hissed reply. 4 Lower away then ; d' ye hear ? ' shouting across the deck. ' Lower away there, I say.' Such was the thunder of his voice, that spite of their VOL. i. s 274 MOBY-DICK amazement the men sprang over the rail ; the sheaves whirled round in the blocks ; with a wallow, the three boats dropped into the sea ; while, with a dexterous, off- handed daring, unknown in any other vocation, the sailors, goat-like, leaped down the rolling ship's side into the tossed boats below. Hardly had they pulled out from under the ship's lee, when a fourth keel, coming from the windward side, pulled round under the stern, and showed the five strangers rowing Ahab, who, standing erect in the stern, loudly hailed Starbuck, Stubb, and Flask, to spread themselves widely, so as to cover a large expanse of water. But with all their eyes again riveted upon the swart Fedallah and his crew, the inmates of the other boats obeyed not the command. ' Captain Ahab ? ' said Starbuck. ' Spread yourselves,' cried Ahab ; ' give way, all four boats. Thou, Flask, pull out more to leeward ! ' ' Ay, ay, sir,' cheerily cried little King-Post, sweeping round his great steering -oar. ' Lay back ! ' addressing his crew. ' There ! there ! there again ! There she blows right ahead, boys ! lay back ! ' ' Never heed yonder yellow boys, Archy.' ' Oh, I don't mind 'em, sir,' said Archy ; ' I knew it all before now. Didn't I hear 'em in the hold ? And didn't I tell Cabaco here of it ? What say ye, Cabaco ? They are stowaways, Mr. Flask.' ' Pull, pull, my fine hearts-alive ; pull, my children ; pull, my little ones,' drawlingly and soothingly sighed Stubb to his crew, some of whom still showed signs of uneasiness. ' Why don't you break your backbones, my boys ? What is it you stare at ? Those chaps in yonder boat ? Tut ! They are only five more hands come to help us never mind from where the more the merrier. Pull, then, do pull ; never mind the brimstone devils THE FIRST LOWERING 275 are good fellows enough. So, so ; there you are now ; that 's the stroke for a thousand pounds ; that 's the stroke to sweep the stakes ! Hurrah for the gold cup of sperm oil, my heroes ! Three cheers, men all hearts- alive ! Easy, easy ; don't be in a hurry don't be in a hurry. Why don't you snap your oars, you rascals ? Bite something, you dogs ! So, so, so, then ; softly, softly ! That 's it that 's it ! long and strong. Give way there, give way ! The devil fetch ye, ye ragamuffin rapscallions ; ye are all asleep. Stop snoring, ye sleepers, and pull. Pull, will ye ? pull, can't ye ? pull, won't ye ? Why in the name of gudgeons and ginger-cakes don't ye pull ? pull and break something ! pull, and start your eyes out ! Here ! ' whipping out the sharp knife from his girdle ; ' every mother's son of ye draw his knife, and pull with the blade between his teeth. That J s it that 's it. Now ye do something ; that looks like it, my steel-bits. Start her start her, my silver-spoons ! Start her, marling-spikes ! ' Stubb's exordium to his crew is given here at large, because he had rather a peculiar way of talking to them in general, and especially in inculcating the religion of rowing. But you must not suppose from this specimen of his sermonisings that he ever flew into downright passions with his congregation. Not at all ; and therein consisted his chief peculiarity. He would say the most terrific things to his crew, in a tone so strangely com- pounded of fun and fury, and the fury seemed so calcu- lated merely as a spice to the fun, that no oarsman could hear such queer invocations without pulling for dear life, and yet pulling for the mere joke of the thing. Be- sides he all the time looked so easy and indolent himself, so loungingly managed his steering-oar, and so broadly gaped open-mouthed at times that the mere sight of such a yawning commander, by sheer force of contrast, 276 MOBY-DICK acted like a charm upon the crew. Then again, Stubb was one of those odd sort of humorists, whose jollity is sometimes so curiously ambiguous, as to put all in- feriors on their guard in the matter of obeying them. In obedience to a sign from Ahab, Starbuck was now pulling obliquely across Stubb 's bow ; and when for a minute or so the two boats were pretty near to each other, Stubb hailed the mate. 4 Mr. Starbuck ! larboard boat there, ahoy ! a word with ye, sir, if ye please ! ' ' Halloa ! ' returned Starbuck, turning round not a single inch as he spoke ; still earnestly but whisperingly urging his crew ; his face set like a flint from Stubb 's. ' What think ye of those yellow boys, sir ? ' ' Smuggled on board, somehow, before the ship sailed. (Strong, strong, boys ! ') in a whisper to his crew, then speaking out loud again : ' A sad business, Mr. Stubb ! (Seethe her, seethe her, my lads !) but never mind, Mr. Stubb, all for the best. Let all your crew pull strong, come what will. (Spring, my men, spring !) There 's hogsheads of sperm ahead, Mr. Stubb, and that 's what ye came for. (Pull, my boys !) Sperm, sperm 's the play ! This at least is duty ; duty and profit hand in hand ! ' ' Ay, ay, I thought as much,' soliloquised Stubb, when the boats diverged, c as soon as I clapt eye on 'em, I thought so. Ay, and that 's what he went into the after-hold for, so often, as Dough -Boy long suspected. They were hidden down there. The White Whale 's at the bottom of it. Well, well, so be it ! Can't be helped ! All right ! Give way, men ! It ain't the White Whale to-day ! Give way ! ' Now the advent of these outlandish strangers at such a critical instant as the lowering of the boats from the deck, this had not unreasonably awakened a sort of THE FIRST LOWERING 277 superstitious amazement in some of the ship's company ; but Archy's fancied discovery having some time previous got abroad among them, though indeed not credited then, this had in some small measure prepared them for the event. It took off the extreme edge of their wonder ; and so what with all this and Stubb's confident way of accounting for their appearance, they were for the time freed from superstitious surmisings ; though the affair still left abundant room for all manner of wild conjectures as to dark Ahab's precise agency in the matter from the beginning. For me, I silently recalled the mysterious shadows I had seen creeping on board the Pequod during the dim Nantucket dawn, as well as the enigmatical hintings of the unaccountable Elijah. Meantime, Ahab, out of hearing of his officers, having sided the furthest to windward, was still ranging ahead of the other boats ; a circumstance bespeaking how potent a crew was pulling him. Those tiger-yellow creatures of his seemed all steel and whalebone ; like five trip-hammers they rose and fell with regular strokes of strength, which periodically started the boat along the water like a hori- zontal burst boiler out of a Mississippi steamer. As for Fedallah, who was seen pulling the harpooneer-oar, he had thrown aside his black jacket, and displayed his naked chest with the whole part of his body above the gunwale, clearly cut against the alternating depressions of the watery horizon ; while at the other end of the boat Ahab, with one arm, like a fencer's, thrown half backward into the air, as if to counterbalance any tendency to trip ; Ahab was seen steadily managing his steering -oar as in a j thousand boat lowerings ere the White Whale had torn( him. All at once the outstretched arm gave a peculiar motion and then remained fixed, while the boat's five oars were seen simultaneously peaked. Boat and crew sat motionless on the sea. Instantly the three spread boats 278 MOBY-DICK in the rear paused on their way. The whales had irregu- larly settled bodily down into the blue, thus giving no distantly discernible token of the movement, though from his closer vicinity Ahab had observed it. 4 Every man look out along his oars ! ' cried Starbuck. ' Thou, Queequeg, stand up ! ' Nimbly springing up on the triangular raised box in the bow, the savage stood erect there, and with intensely eager eyes gazed off toward the spot where the chase had last been descried. Likewise upon the extreme stern of the boat where it was also triangularly platformed level with the gunwale, Starbuck himself was seen coolly and adroitly balancing himself to the jerking tossings of his chip of a craft, and silently eyeing the vast blue eye of the sea. Not very far distant Flask's boat was also lying breath- lessly still ; its commander recklessly standing upon the top of the logger-head, a stout sort of post rooted in the keel, and rising some two feet above the level of the stern platform. It is used for catching turns with the whale - line. Its top is not more spacious than the palm of a man's hand, and standing upon such a base as that, Flask seemed perched at the mast-head of some ship which had sunk to all but her trucks. But little King-Post was small and short, and at the same time little King-Post was full of a large and tall ambition, so that this logger-head stand- point of his did by no means satisfy King-Post. c I can't see three seas off ; tip us up an oar there, and let me on to that.' Upon this, Daggoo, with either hand upon the gunwale ' to steady his way, swiftly slid aft, and then erecting him- self volunteered his lofty shoulders for a pedestal. ' Good a mast-head as any, sir. Will you mount ? ' ' That I will, and thank ye very much, my fine fellow ; only I wish you fifty feet taller.' THE FIRST LOWERING 279 Whereupon planting his feet firmly against two opposite planks of the boat, the gigantic negro, stooping a little, presented his flat palm to Flask's foot, and then putting Flask's hand on his hearse-plumed head and bidding him spring as he himself should toss, with one dexterous fling landed the little man high and dry on his shoulders. And here was Flask now standing, Daggoo with one lifted arm furnishing him with a breast- band to lean against and steady himself by. At any time it is a strange sight to the tyro to see with what wondrous habitude of unconscious skill the whale- man will maintain an erect posture in his boat, even when pitched about by the most riotously perverse and cross- running seas. Still more strange to see him giddily perched upon the logger-head itself, under such circum- stances. But the sight of little Flask mounted upon gigantic Daggoo was yet more curious ; for sustaining himself with a cool, indifferent, easy, unthought-of, barbaric majesty, the noble negro to every roll of the sea harmoniously rolled his fine form. On his broad back, flaxen-haired Flask seemed a snow-flake. The bearer looked nobler than the rider. Though truly vivacious, tumultuous, ostentatious little Flask would now and then stamp with impatience ; but not one added heave did he thereby give to the negro's lordly chest. So have I seen Passion and Vanity stamping the living magnanimous' earth, but the earth did not alter her tides and her seasons for that. Meanwhile Stubb, the third mate, betrayed no such far-gazing solicitudes. The whales might have made one of their regular soundings, not a temporary dive from mere fright ; and if that were the case, Stubb, as his wont in such cases, it seems, was resolved to solace the languishing interval with his pipe. He withdrew it from his hat-band, where he always wore it aslant like a feather. 280 MOBY-DICK He loaded it, and rammed home the loading with his thumb-end ; but hardly had he ignited his match across the rough sandpaper of his hand, when Tashtego, his harpooneer, whose eyes had been setting to windward like two fixed stars, suddenly dropped like light from his erect attitude to his seat, crying out in a quick frenzy of hurry, ' Down, down all, and give way ! there they are ! ' To a landsman, no whale, nor any sign of a herring, would have been visible at that moment ; nothing but a troubled bit of greenish-white water, and thin scattered puffs of vapour hovering over it, and suffusingly blowing off to leeward, like the confused scud from white rolling billows. The air around suddenly vibrated and tingled, as it were, like the air over intensely heated plates of iron. Beneath this atmospheric waving and curling, and partially beneath a thin layer of water, also, the whales were swimming. Seen in advance of all the other indi- cations, the puffs of vapour they spouted, seemed their forerunning couriers and detached flying outriders. All four bojits were now in keen pursuit of that one spot of troubled water and air. But it bade far to outstrip them ; it flew on and on, as a mass of interblending bubbles borne down a rapid stream from the hills. ' Pull, pull, my good boys,' said Starbuck, in the lowest possible but intensest concentrated whisper to his men ; while the sharp fixed glance from his eyes darted straight ahead of the bow, almost seemed as two visible needles in two unerring binnacle compasses. He did not say much to his crew, though, nor did his crew say anything to him. Only the silence of the boat was at intervals startlingly pierced by one of his peculiar whispers, now harsh with command, now soft with entreaty. How different the loud little King-Post. ' Sing out and say something, my hearties. Roar and pull, my thunderbolts ! Beach me, beach me on their black backs, THE FIRST LOWERING 281 boys ; only do that for me, and 1 11 sign over to you my Martha's Vineyard plantation, boys ; including wife and children, boys. Lay me on lay me on ! Lord, Lord ! but I shall go stark, staring mad ! See ! see that white water ! ' And so shouting, he pulled his hat from his head, and stamped up and down on it ; then picking it up, flirted it far off upon the sea ; and finally fell to rearing and plunging in the boat's stern like a crazed colt from the prairie. ' Look at that chap now,' philosophically drawled Stubb, who, with his unlighted short pipe, mechanically retained between his teeth, at a short distance, followed after ' He 's got fits, that Flask has. Fits ? yes, give him fits that 's the very word pitch fits into 'em. Merrily, merrily, hearts -alive. Pudding for supper, you know ; merry 's the word. Pull, babes pull, sucklings pull, all. But what the devil are you hurrying about ? Softly, softly, and steadily, my men. Only pull, and keep pulling ; nothing more. Crack all your backbones, and bite your knives hi two that 's all. Take it easy why don't ye take it easy, I say, and burst all your livers and lungs ! ' But what it was that inscrutable Ahab said to that tiger-yellow crew of his these were words best omitted here ; for you live under the blessed light of the evangelical land. Only the infidel sharks in the audacious seas may give ear to such words, when, with tornado brow, and eyes of red murder, and foam-glued lips, Ahab leaped after his prey. Meanwhile, all the boats tore on. The repeated specific allusions of Flask to ' that whale,' as he called the fictitious monster which he declared to be incessantly tantalising his boat's bow with his tail these allusions of his were at times so vivid and lifelike, that they would cause some one or two of his men to snatch a fearful look over the 282 MOBY-DICK shoulder. But this was against all rule ; for the oarsmen must put out their eyes, and ram a skewer through their necks ; usage pronouncing that they must have no organs but ears, and no limbs but arms, in these critical moments. It was a sight full of quick wonder and awe ! The vast swells of the omnipotent sea ; the surging, hollow roar they made, as they rolled along the eight gunwales, like gigantic bowls in a boundless bowling-green ; the brief suspended agony of the boat, as it would tip for an instant on the knife-like edge of the sharper waves, that almost seemed threatening to cut it in two ; the sudden profound dip into the watery glens and hollows ; the keen spurrings and goadings to gain the top of the opposite hill ; the headlong, sled-like slide down its other side ; all these, with the cries of the headsmen and harpooneers, and the shuddering gasps of the oarsmen, with the won- drous sight of the ivory Pequod bearing down upon her boats with outstretched sails, like a wild hen after her screaming brood ; all this was thrilling. Not the raw recruit, marching from the bosom of his wife into the fever- heat of his first battle ; not the dead man's ghost en- countering the first unknown phantom in the other world ; neither of these can feel stranger and stronger emotions than that man does, who for the first time finds himself pulling into the charmed, churned circle of the hunted sperm whale. The dancing white water made by the chase was now becoming more and more visible, owing to the increasing darkness of the dun cloud-shadows flung upon the sea. The jets of vapour no longer blended, but tilted every- where to right and left ; the whales seemed separating their wakes. The boats were pulled more apart ; Star- buck giving chase to three whales running dead to lee- ward. Our sail was now set, and, with the still rising THE FIRST LOWERING 283 wind, we rushed along ; the boat going with such madness through the water, that the lee -oars could scarcely be worked rapidly enough to escape being torn from the rowlocks. Soon we were running through a suffusing wide veil of mist ; neither ship nor boat to be seen. 4 Give way, men,' whispered Starbuck, drawing still further aft the sheet of his sail ; ' there is time to kill a fish yet before the squall comes. There 's white water again ! close to ! Spring ! * Soon after, two cries in quick succession on each side of us denoted that the other boats had got fast ; but hardly were they overheard, when with a lightning-like hurtling whisper Starbuck said : ' Stand up ! ' and Quee- queg, harpoon in hand, sprang to his feet. Though not one of the oarsmen was then facing the life and death peril so close to them ahead, yet with their eyes on the intense countenance of the mate in the stern of the boat, they knew that the imminent instant had come ; they heard, too, an enormous wallowing sound as of fifty elephants stirring in their litter. Meanwhile the boat was still booming through the mist, the waves curling and hissing around us like the erected crests of enraged serpents. ' That 's his hump. There, there, give it to him ! ' whispered Starbuck. A short rushing sound leaped out of the boat ; it was the darted iron of Queequeg. Then all in one welded commotion came an invisible push from astern, while forward the boat seemed striking on a ledge ; the sail collapsed and exploded ; a gush of scalding vapour shot up near by ; something rolled and tumbled like an earth- quake beneath us. The whole crew were half suffocated as they were tossed helter-skelter into the white curdling cream of the squall. Squall, whale, and harpoon had all 284 MOBY-DICK blended together ; and the whale, merely grazed by the iron, escaped. Though completely swamped, the boat was nearly unharmed. Swimming round it we picked up the floating oars, and lashing them across the gunwale, tumbled back to our places. There we sat up to our knees in the sea, the water covering every rib and plank, so that to our downward-gazing eyes the suspended craft seemed a coral boat grown up to us from the bottom of the ocean. The wind increased to a howl ; the waves dashed their bucklers together ; the whole squall roared, forked, and crackled around us like a white fire upon the prairie, in which, unconsumed, we were burning ; immortal in these jaws of death ! In vain we hailed the other boats ; as well roar to the live coals down the chimney of a flaming furnace as hail those boats in that storm. Meanwhile the driving scud, rack, and mist grew darker with the shadows of night ; no sign of the ship could be seen. The rising sea forbade all attempts to bale out the boat. The oars were useless as propellers, performing now the office of life-preservers. So, cutting the lashing of the waterproof match keg, after many failures Starbuck contrived to ignite the lamp in the lantern ; then stretch- ing it on a waif -pole, handed it to Queequeg as the standard- bearer of this forlorn hope. There, then, he sat, holding up that imbecile candle in the heart of that almighty forlornness. There, then, he sat, the sign and symbol of a man without faith, hopelessly holding up hope in the midst of despair. Wet, drenched through, and shivering cold, despairing of ship or boat, we lifted up our eyes as the dawn came on. The mist still spread over the sea, the empty lantern lay crushed in the bottom of the boat. Suddenly Queequeg started to his feet, hollowing his hand to his ear. We all heard a faint creaking, as of ropes and yards hitherto THE FIRST LOWERING 285 muffled by the storm. The sound came nearer and nearer ; the thick mists were dimly parted by a huge, vague form. Affrighted, we all sprang into the sea as the ship at last loomed into view, bearing right down upon us within a distance of not much more than its length. Floating on the waves we saw the abandoned boat, as for one instant it tossed and gaped beneath the ship's bows like a chip at the base of a cataract ! and then the vast hull rolled over it, and it was seen no more till it came up weltering astern. Again we swam for it, were dashed against it by the seas, and were at last taken up and safely landed on board. Ere the squall came close to, the other boats had cut loose from their fish and returned to the ship in good time. The ship had given us up, but was still cruising, if haply it might light upon some token of our perishing, an oar or a lance pole. CHAPTER XL1X THE HYENA THERE are certain queer times and occasions in this strange mixed affair we call life when a man takes this whole universe for a vast practical joke, though the wit thereof he but dimly discerns, and more than suspects that the joke is at nobody's expense but his own. How- ever, nothing dispirits, and nothing seems worth while disputing. He bolts down all events, all creeds, and beliefs, and persuasions, all hard things visible and in- visible, never mind how knobby ; as an ostrich of potent digestion gobbles down bullets and gun flints. And as for small difficulties and worryings, prospects of sudden disaster, peril of life and limb ; all these, and death itself, seem to him only sly, good-natured hits, and jolly punches in the side bestowed by the unseen and unaccountable old joker. That odd sort of wayward mood I am speaking of, comes over a man only in some time of extreme tribu- lation ; it comes in the very midst of his earnestness, so that what just before might have seemed to him a thing most momentous, now seems but a part of the general joke. There is nothing like the perils of whaling to breed this free-and-easy sort of genial, desperado philosophy ; and with it I now regarded this whole voyage of the Pequod, and the great White Whale its object. ' Queequeg/ said I, when they had dragged me, the }ast man, to the deck, and I was still shaking myself in my jacket to fling off the water ; ' Queequeg, my fine friend, does this sort of thing often happen ? ' Without 286 THE HYENA 287 much emotion, though soaked through just like me, he gave me to understand that such things did often happen. 4 Mr. Stubb,' said I, turning to that worthy, who, buttoned up in his oil-jacket, was now calmly smoking his pipe in the rain ; ' Mr. Stubb, I think I have heard you say that of all whalemen you ever met, our chief mate, Mr. Starbuck, is by far the most careful and prudent. I suppose then, that going plump on a flying whale with your sail set in a foggy squall is the height of a whaleman's discretion ? ' 1 Certain. I 've lowered for whales from a leaking ship in a gale off Cape Horn.' 4 Mr. Flask,' said I, turning to little King-Post, who was standing close by ; ' you are experienced in these things, and I am not. Will you tell me whether it is an unalter- able law in this fishery, Mr. Flask, for an oarsman to break his own back pulling himself back-foremost into death's jaws ? ' ' Can't you twist that smaller ? ' said Flask. ' Yes, that 's the law. I should like to see a boat's crew backing water up to a whale face foremost. Ha, ha ! the whale would give them squint for squint, mind that ! J Here then, from three impartial witnesses, I had a deliberate statement of the entire case. Considering, therefore, that squalls and capsizings in the water and consequent bivouacks on the deep, were matters of common -occurrence in this kind of life ; considering that at the superlatively critical instant of going on to the whale I must resign my life into the hands of him who steered the boat oftentimes a fellow who at that very moment is in his impetuousness upon the point of scuttling the craft with his own frantic stampings ; considering that the particular disaster to our own particular boat was chiefly to be imputed to Starbuck's driving on to his whale almost in the teeth of a squall, and considering that 288 MOBY-DICK Starbuck, notwithstanding, was famous for his great heedfulness in the fishery ; considering that I belonged to this uncommonly prudent Starbuck 's boat ; and finally considering in what a devil's chase I was implicated, touching the White Whale : taking all things together, I say, I thought I might as well go below and make a rough draft of my will. ' Queequeg,' said I, ' come along, you shall be my lawyer, executor, and legatee/ It may seem strange that of all men sailors should be tinkering at their last wills and testaments, but there are no people in the world more fond of that diversion. This was the fourth time in my nautical life that I had done the same thing. After the ceremony was concluded upon the present occasion, I felt all the easier ; a stone was rolled away from my heart. Besides, all the days I should now live would be as good as the days that Lazarus lived after his resurrection ; a supplementary clean gain of so many months or weeks as the case might be. I survived myself ; my death and burial were locked up in my chest. I looked round me tranquilly and contentedly, like a quiet ghost with a clean conscience sitting inside the bars of a snug family vault. Now then, thought I, unconsciously rolling up the sleeves of my frock, here goes for a cool, collected dive at death and destruction, and the devil fetch the hindmost. CHAPTER L ARAB'S BOAT AND CREW. FEDALLAH * WHO would have thought it, Flask ! ' cried Stubb. ' If I had but one leg you would not catch me in a boat, unless maybe to stop the plug-hole with my timber toe. Oh ! he 's a wonderful old man ! ' ' I don't think it so strange, after all, on that account,' said Flask. ' If his leg were off at the hip, now, it would be a different thing. That would disable him ; but he has one knee, and good part of the other left, you know.' ' I don't know that, my little man ; I never yet saw him kneel.' ******* Among whale -wise people it has often been argued whether, considering the paramount importance of his life to the success of the voyage, it is right for a whaling- captain to jeopardise that life in the active perils of the chase. So Tamerlane's soldiers often argued with tears in their eyes, whether that invaluable life of his ought to be carried into the thickest of the fight. But with Ahab the question assumed a modified aspect. Considering that with two legs man is but a hobbling wight in all times of danger ; considering that the pursuit of whales is always under great and extraordinary diffi- culties ; that every individual moment, indeed, then comprises a peril ; under these circumstances is it wise for any maimed man to enter a whale-boat in the hunt ? As a general thing, the joint-owners of the Pequod must have plainly thought not. VOL. I. T 290 MOBY-DICK Ahab well knew that although his friends at home would think little of his entering a boat in certain com- paratively harmless vicissitudes of the chase, for the sake of being near the scene of action and giving his orders in person, yet for Captain Ahab to have a boat actually apportioned to him as a regular headsman in the hunt above all, for Captain Ahab to be supplied with five extra men, as that same boat's crew, he well knew that such generous conceits never entered the heads of the owners of the Pequod. Therefore he had not solicited a boat's crew from them, nor had he in any way hinted his desires on that head. Nevertheless he had taken private measure of his own touching all that matter. Until Cabaco's published discovery, the sailors had little foreseen it, though to be sure when, after being a little while out of port, all hands had concluded the customary business of fitting the whale-boats for service ; when some time after this Ahab was now and then found bestirring himself in the matter of making thole-pins with his own hands for what was thought to be one of the spare boats, and even solicitously cutting the small wooden skewers, which when the line is running out are pinned over the groove in the bow ; when all this was observed in him, and par- ticularly his solicitude hi having an extra coat of sheath- ing in the bottom of the boat, as if to make it better withstand the pointed pressure of his ivory limb ; and also the anxiety he evinced in exactly shaping the thigh - board, or clumsy cleat, as it is sometimes called, the hori- zontal piece in the boat's bow for bracing the knee against in darting or stabbing at the whale ; when it was observed how often he stood up in that boat with his solitary knee fixed in the semicircular depression in the cleat, and with the carpenter's chisel gouged out a little here and straightened it a little there ; all these things, I say, had awakened much interest and curiosity at the time. But FEDALLAH 291 almost everybody supposed that this particular prepara- tive heedfulness in Ahab must only be with a view to the ultimate chase of Moby-Dick ; for he had already revealed his intention to hunt that mortal monster in person. But such a supposition did by no means involve the remotest suspicion as to any boat's crew being assigned to that boat. Now, with the subordinate phantoms, what wonder remained soon waned away ; for in a whaler wonders soon wane. Besides, now and then such unaccountable odds and ends of strange nations come up from the unknown nooks and ash-holes of the earth to man these floating outlaws of whalers ; and the ships themselves often pick up such queer castaway creatures found tossing about the open sea on planks, bits of wreck, oars, whale-boats, canoes, blown-off Japanese junks, and what not ; that Beelzebub himself might climb up the side and step down into the cabin to chat with the captain, and it would not create any unsubduable excitement in the forecastle. But be all this as it may, certain it is that while the subordinate phantoms soon found their place among the crew, though still as it were somehow distinct from them, yet that hair-turbaned Fedallah remained a muffled mystery to the last. Whence he came in a mannerly world like this, by what sort of unaccountable tie he soon evinced himself to be linked with Ahab's peculiar fortunes; nay, so far as to have some sort of a half -hinted influence ; Heaven knows, but it might have been even authority over him ; all this none knew. But one cannot sustain an indifferent air concerning Fedallah. He was such a creature as civilised, domestic people in the temperate zone only see in their dreams, and that but dimly ; but the like of whom now and then glide among the unchang- ing Asiatic communities, especially the oriental isles to the east of the continent those insulated, immemorial, 292 MOBY-DICK unalterable countries, which even in these modern days still preserve much of the ghostly aboriginalness of earth's primal generations, when the memory of the first man was a distinct recollection, and all men his descendants, un- knowing whence he came, eyed each other as real phan- toms, and asked of the sun and the moon why they were created and to what end ; when though, according to Genesis, the angels indeed consorted with the daughters of men, the devils also, add the uncanonical Rabbins, indulged in mundane amours. CHAPTER LI THE SPIRIT- SPOUT DAYS, weeks passed, and under easy sail, the ivory Pequod had slowly swept across four several cruising-grounds ; that off the Azores ; off the Cape de Verdes ; on the Plate (so called), being off the mouth of the Bio de la Plata ; and the Carrol ground, an unstaked, watery locality, southerly from St. Helena. It was while gliding through these latter waters that one serene and moonlight night, when all the waves rolled by like scrolls of silver ; and, by their soft, suffusing seethings, made what seemed a silvery silence, not a solitude : on such a silent night a silvery jet was seen far ,; in advance of the white bubbles at the bow. Lit up by I the moon, it looked celestial ; seemed some plumed and glittering god uprising from the sea. Fedallah first descried this jet. For of these moonlight nights, it was his wont to mount to the mainmast-head, and stand a look-out there, with the same precision as if it had been day. And yet, though herds of whales were seen by night, not one whalemen in a hundred would venture a lowering for them. You may think with what emotions, then, the seamen beheld this old Oriental perched aloft at such unusual hours ; his turban and the moon, com- panions in one sky. But when, after spending his uniform interval there for several successive nights without utter- ing a single sound ; when, after all this silence, his un- earthly voice was heard announcing that silvery, moon-lit jet, every reclining mariner started to his feet as if some 293 294 MOBY-DICK winged spirit had lighted in the rigging, and hailed the mortal crew. ' There she blows ! ' Had the trump of judgment blown, they could not have quivered more ; yet still they felt no terror ; rather pleasure. For though it was a most unwonted hour, yet so impressive was the cry, and so deliriously exciting, that almost every soul on board instinctively desired a lowering. Walking the deck with quick, side -lunging strides, Ahab commanded the t '-gallant-sails and royals to be set, and every stun' -sail spread. The best man in the ship must take the helm. Then, with every mast-head manned, the piled-up craft rolled down before the wind. The strange, upheaving, lifting tendency of the taffrail breeze filling the hollows of so many sails, made the buoyant, hovering deck to feel like air beneath the feet ; while still she rushed along, as if two antagonistic influences were struggling in her one to mount direct to heaven, 1 the other to drive yawingly to some horizontal goal. H And had you watched Ahab's face that night, you would have thought that in him also two different things were warring. While his one live leg made lively echoes along the deck, every stroke of his dead limb sounded like a coffin-tap. On life and death this old man walked. But though the ship so swiftly sped, and though from every eye, like arrows, the eager glances shot, yet the silvery jet was no more seen that night. Every sailor swore he saw it once, but not a second time. This midnight-spout had almost grown a forgotten thing, when, some days after, lo ! at the same silent hour, it was again announced : again it was descried by all ; but upon making sail to overtake it, once more it dis- appeared as if it had never been. And so it served us night after night, till no one heeded it but to wonder at it. Mysteriously jetted into the clear moonlight, or starlight, as the case might be ; disappearing again for THE SPIRIT-SPOUT 295 one whole day, or two days, or three ; and somehow seeming at every distinct repetition to be advancing still further and further in our van, this solitary jet seemed forever alluring us on. Nor with the immemorial superstition of their race, and in accordance with the preternaturalness, as it seemed, which in many things invested the Pequod, were there wanting some of the seamen who swore that whenever and wherever descried ; at however remote times, or in however far apart latitudes and longitudes, that unnear- able spout was cast by one self-same whale ; and that whale, Moby-Dick. For a time, there reigned, too, a sense of peculiar dread at this flitting apparition, as if it were treacherously beckoning us on and on, in order that the monster might turn round upon us, and rend us at last in the remotest and most savage seas. These temporary apprehensions, so vague but so awful, derived a wondrous potency from the contrasting serenity of the weather, in which, beneath all its blue blandness, some thought there lurked a devilish charm, as for days and days we voyaged along, through seas so wearily, lonesomely mild, that all space, in repugnance to our vengeful errand, seemed vacating itself of life before our urn-like prow. But, at last, when turning to the eastward, the Cape winds began howling around us, and we rose and fell upon the long, troubled seas that are there ; when the ivory- tusked Pequod sharply bowed to the blast, and gored the dark waves in her madness, till, like showers of silver chips, the foam-flakes flew over her bulwarks ; then all this desolate vacuity of life went away, but gave place to sights more dismal than before. Close to our bows, strange forms in the water darted hither and thither before us ; while thick in our rear flew the inscrutable sea-ravens. And every morning, perched 296 MOBY-DICK on our stays, rows of these birds were seen ; and spite of our hootings, for a long time obstinately clung to the hemp, as though they deemed our ship some drifting, uninhabited craft ; a thing appointed to desolation, and therefore fit roosting-place for their homeless selves. And heaved and heaved, still unrestingly heaved the black sea, as if its vast tides were a conscience ; and the great mundane soul were in anguish and remorse for the long sin and suffering it had bred. Cape of Good Hope, do they call ye ? Rather Cape Tormentoto, as called of yore ; for long allured by the perfidious silences that before had attended us, we found ourselves launched into this tormented sea, where guilty beings transformed into those fowls and these fish, seemed condemned to swim on everlastingly without any haven in store, or beat that black air without any horizon. But calm, snow-white, and unvarying ; still directing its fountain of feathers to the sky ; still beckoning us on from before, the solitary jet would at times be descried. During all this blackness of the elements, Ahab, though assuming for the time the almost continual command of the drenched and dangerous deck, manifested the gloomiest reserve ; and more seldom than ever addressed his mates. In tempestuous times like these, after every- thing above and aloft has been secured, nothing more can be done but passively to await the issue of the gale. Then captain and crew become practical fatalists. So, with his ivory leg inserted into its accustomed hole, and with one hand firmly grasping a shroud, Ahab for hours and hours would stand gazing dead to windward, while an occasional squall of sleet or snow would all but congeal his very eyelashes together. Meantime, the crew driven from the forward part of the ship by the perilous seas that burstingly broke over its bows, stood in a line along the bulwarks in the waist ; and the better to guard against THE SPIRIT-SPOUT 297 the leaping waves, each man had slipped himself into a sort of bow-line secured to the rail, in which he swung as in a loosened belt. Few or no words were spoken ; and the silent ship, as if manned by painted sailors in wax, day after day tore on through all the swift madness and gladness of the demoniac waves. By night the same muteness of humanity before the shrieks of the ocean prevailed ; still in silence the men swung in the bow-lines ; still wordless Ahab stood up to the blast. Even when wearied nature seemed demanding repose, he would not seek that repose in his hammock. Never could Starbuck forget the old man's aspect, when one night going down into the cabin to mark how the barometer stood, he saw him with closed eyes sitting straight in his floor-screwed chair ; the rain and half-melted sleet of the storm from which he had some time before emerged, still slowly dripping from the unremoved hat and coat. On the table beside him lay unrolled one of those charts of tides and currents which have previously been spoken of. His lantern swung from his tightly clenched hand. Though the body was erect, the head was thrown back so that the closed eyes were pointed toward the needle of the tell- tale that swung from a beam in the ceiling. 1 Terrible old man ! thought Starbuck with a shudder, sleeping in this gale, still thou steadfastly eyest thy purpose. 1 The cabin-compass is called the tell-tale, because, without going to the compass at the helm, the captain, while below, can inform himself of the course of the ship. CHAPTER LII THE ALBATROSS SOUTH-EASTWARD from the Cape, off the distant Crozetts, a good cruising -ground for right whalemen, a sail loomed ahead, the Goney (Albatross) by name. As she slowly drew nigh, from my lofty perch at the foremast -head, I had a good view of that sight so remarkable to a tyro in the far ocean fisheries a whaler at sea, and long absent from home. As if the waves had been fullers, this craft was bleached like the skeleton of a stranded walrus. All down her sides, this spectral appearance was traced with long channels of reddened rust, while all her spars and her rigging were like the thick branches of trees furred over with hoar-frost. Only her lower sails were set. A wild sight it was to see her long-bearded look-outs at those three mast-heads. They seemed clad in the skins of beasts, so torn and bepatched the raiment that had survived nearly four years of cruising. Standing in iron hoops nailed to the mast, they swayed and swung over a fathom- less sea ; and though, when the ship slowly glided close under our stern, we six men in the air came so nigh to each other that we might almost have leaped from the mast- heads of one ship to those of the other ; yet, those for- lorn-looking fishermen, mildly eyeing us as they passed, said not one word to our own look-outs, while the quarter- deck hail was being heard from below. ' Ship ahoy ! Have ye seen the White Whale ? ' But as the strange captain, leaning over the pallid THE ALBATROSS 299 bulwarks, was in the act of putting his trumpet to his mouth, it somehow fell from his hand into the sea ; and the wind now rising amain, he in vain strove to make himself heard without it. Meantime, his ship was still increasing the distance between. While in various silent ways the seamen of the Pequod were evincing their observ- ance of this ominous incident at the first mere mention of the White Whale's name to another ship, Ahab for a moment paused ; it almost seemed as though he would have lowered a boat to board the stranger, had not the threatening wind forbade. But taking advantage of his windward position, he again seized his trumpet, and knowing by her aspect that the stranger vessel was a Nantucketer and shortly bound home, he loudly hailed ' Ahoy there ! This is the Pequod, bound round the world ! Tell them to address all future letters to the Pacific Ocean ! and this time three years, if I am not at home, tell them to address them to ' At that moment the two wakes were fairly crossed, and instantly, then, in accordance with their singular ways, shoals of small harmless fish, that for some days before had been placidly swimming by our side, darted away with what seemed shuddering fins, and ranged themselves fore and aft with the stranger's flanks. Though in the course of his continual voyagings Ahab must often before have noticed a similar sight, yet, to any monomaniac man, the veriest trifles capriciously carry meanings. ' Swim away from me, do ye ? ' murmured Ahab, gazing over into the water. There seemed but little in the words, but the tone conveyed more of deep helpless sadness than the insane old man had ever before evinced. But turning to the steersman, who thus far had been holding the ship in the wind to diminish her headway, he cried out in his old lion voice, ' Up helm ! Keep her off round the world ! ' 300 MOBY-DICK Round the world ! There is much in that sound to inspire proud feelings ; but whereto does all that circum- navigation conduct ? Only through numberless perils to the very point whence we started, where those that we left behind secure, were all the time before us. Were this world an endless plain, and by sailing east- ward we could forever reach new distances, and discover sights more sweet and strange than any Cyclades or Islands of King Solomon, then there were promise in the voyage. But in pursuit of those far mysteries we dream of, or in tormented chase of that demon phantom that, some time or other, swims before all human hearts ; while chasing such over this round globe, they either lead us on in barren mazes or midway leave us whelmed. CHAPTER LIII THE GAM THE ostensible reason why Ahab did not go on board of the whaler we had spoken was this : the wind and sea be- tokened storms. But even had this not been the case, he would not after all, perhaps, have boarded her judging by his subsequent conduct on similar occasions if so it had been that, by the process of hailing, he had obtained a negative answer to the question he put. For, as it eventually turned out, he cared not to consort, even for five minutes, with any stranger captain, except he could contribute some of that information he so absorbingly sought. But all this might remain inadequately esti- mated, were not something said here of the peculiar usages of whaling-vessels wlfen meeting each other in foreign seas, and especially on a common cruising-ground. If two strangers crossing the Pine Barrens in New York State, or the equally desolate Salisbury Plain in England ; if casually encountering each other in such inhospitable wilds, these twain, for the life of them, cannot well avoid a mutual salutation ; and stopping for a moment to interchange the news ; and, perhaps, sitting down for a while and resting in concert : then, how much more natural that upon the illimitable Pine Barrens and Salisbury Plains of the sea, two whaling-vessels descrying each other at the ends of the earth off lone Fanning 's Island, or the far away King's Mills ; how much more natural, I say, that under such circumstances these ships should not only interchange hails, but come into still closer, more friendly and sociable contact. And especially would this seem to 901 302 MOBY-DICK be a matter of course, in the case of vessels owned in one seaport, and whose captains, officers, and not a few of the men are personally known to each other ; and consequently, have all sorts of dear domestic things to talk about. For the long absent ship, the outward-bounder, per- haps, has letters on board ; at any rate, she will be sure to let her have some papers of a date a year or two later than the last one on her blurred and thumb-worn files. And in return for that courtesy, the outward-bound ship would receive the latest whaling intelligence from the cruising-ground to which she may be destined, a thing of the utmost importance to her. And in degree, all this will hold true concerning whaling-vessels crossing each other's track on the cruising-ground itself, even though they are equally long absent from home. For one of them may have received a transfer of letters from some third, and now far remote vessel ; and some of those letters may be for the people of the ship she now meets. Besides, they would exchange the whaling news, and have an agreeable chat. For not only would they meet with all the sympathies of sailors, but likewise with all the peculiar congenialities arising from a common pursuit and mutually shared privations and perils. Nor would difference of country make any very essential difference ; that is, so long as both parties speak one lan- guage, as is the case with Americans and English. Though, to be sure, from the small number of English whalers, such meetings do not very often occur, and when they do occur there is too apt to be a sort of shyness between them ; for your Englishman is rather reserved, and your Yankee, he does not fancy that sort of thing in anybody but himself. Besides, the English whalers sometimes affect a kind of metropolitan superiority over the American whalers ; regarding the long, lean Nan- tucketer, with his nondescript provincialisms, as a sort of sea-peasant. But where this superiority in the English THE GAM 303 whalemen does really consist, it would be hard to say, seeing that the Yankees in one day, collectively, kill more whales than all the English, collectively, in ten years. But this is a harmless little foible in the English whale- hunters, which the Nantucketer does not take much to heart ; probably, because he knows that he has a few foibles himself. So, then, we see that of all ships separately sailing the sea, the whalers have most reason to be sociable and they are so. Whereas, some merchant ships crossing each other's wake in the mid- Atlantic, will oftentimes pass on without so much as a single word of recognition, mutually cutting each other on the high seas, like a brace of dandies in Broadway ; and all the time indulging, perhaps, in finical criticism upon each other's rig. As for men-of-war, when they chance to meet at sea, they first go through such a string of silly bowings and scrapings, such a ducking of ensigns, that there does not seem to be much right-down hearty goodwill and brotherly love about it at all. As touching slave-ships meeting, why, they are in such a prodigious hurry, they run away from each other as soon as possible. And as for pirates, when they chance to cross each other's cross-bones, the first hail is, ' How many skulls ? ' the same way that whalers hail ' How many barrels ? ' And that question once answered, pirates straightway steer apart, for they are infernal villains on both sides, and don't like to see overmuch of each other's villainous likenesses. But look at the godly, honest, unostentatious, hos- pitable, sociable, free-and-easy whaler ! What does the whaler do when she meets another whaler in any sort of decent weather ? She has a ' Gam,' a thing so utterly unknown to all other ships that they never heard of the name even ; and if by chance they should hear of it, they only grin at it, and repeat gamesome stuff about 'spouters' and c blubber-boilers,' and such like pretty exclamations. 304 MOBY-DICK Why it is that all merchant seamen, and also all pirates and man-of-war's men, and slave-ship sailors, cherish such a scornful feeling toward whale-ships ; this is a question it would be hard to answer. Because, in the case of pirates, say, I should like to know whether that profession of theirs has any peculiar glory about it. It sometimes ends in uncommon elevation, indeed ; but only at the gallows. And besides, when a man is elevated in that odd fashion, he has no proper foundation for his superior altitude. Hence, I conclude, that in boasting himself to be high lifted above a whaleman, in that assertion the pirate has no solid basis to stand on. But what is a Gam ? You might wear out your index finger running up and down the columns of dictionaries, and never find the word. Dr. Johnson never attained to that erudition ; Noah Webster's ark does not hold it. Nevertheless, this same expressive word has now for many years been in constant use among some fifteen thousand true-born Yankees. Certainly, it needs a definition, and should be incorporated into the Lexicon. With that view, let me learnedly define it. GAM. NOUN A social meeting of two (or more) whale-ships, generally on a cruising-ground ; when, after exchanging hails, they exchange visits by boats' crews : the two captains remaining, for the time, on board of one ship t and the two chief mates on the other. There is another little item about Gamming which must not be forgotten here. All professions have their own little peculiarities of detail ; so has the whale-fishery. In a pirate, man-of-war, or slave-ship, when the captain is rowed anywhere hi his boat, he always sits in the stern- sheets on a comfortable, sometimes cushioned seat there, and often steers himself with a pretty little milliner's tiller decorated with gay cords and ribbons. But the whale-boat has no seat astern, no sofa of that sort what- THE GAM 305 ever, and no tiller at all. High times indeed, if whaling- captains were wheeled about the water on castors like gouty old aldermen in patent chairs. And as for a tiller, the whale-boat never admits of any such effeminacy ; and therefore as in gamming a complete boat's crew must leave the ship, and hence as the boat steerer or harpooneer is of the number, that subordinate is the steersman upon the occasion, and the captain, having no place to sit in, is pulled off to his visit all standing like a pine-tree. And often you will notice that being conscious of the eyes of the whole visible world resting on him from the sides of the two ships, this standing captain is all alive to the importance of sustaining his dignity by maintaining his legs. Nor is this any very easy matter ; for in his rear is the immense projecting steering-oar hitting him now and then in the small of his back, the after-oar reciprocat- ing by rapping his knees in front. He is thus completely wedged before and behind, and can only expand himself sideways by settling down on his stretched legs ; but a sudden, violent pitch of the boat will often go far to topple him, because length of foundation is nothing without corresponding breadth. Merely make a spread angle of two poles, and you cannot stand them up. Then, again, it would never do in plain sight of the world's riveted eyes, it would never do, I say, for this straddling captain to be seen steadying himself the slightest particle by catching hold of anything with his hands ; indeed, as token of his entire, buoyant self-command, he generally carries his hands in his trowsers' pockets ; but perhaps being generally very large, heavy hands, he carries them there for ballast. Nevertheless there have occurred instances, well authenticated ones too, where the captain has been known for an uncommonly critical moment or two, in a sudden squall, say to seize hold of the nearest oarsman's hair, and hold on there like grim death. VOL. i. u CHAPTER L1V THE TOWN-HO'S STORY (As told at the Golden Inn.) THE Cape of Good Hope, and all the watery region round about there, is much like some noted four corners of a great highway, where you meet more travellers than in any other part. It was not very long after speaking the Goney that another homeward-bound whaleman, the Town-Ho? was encountered. She was manned almost wholly by Poly- nesians. In the short gam that ensued she gave us strong news of Moby-Dick. To some the general interest in the White Whale was now wildly heightened by a circumstance of the Town-Ho' s story, which seemed obscurely to in- volve with the whale a certain wondrous, inverted visi- tation of one of those so-called judgments of God which at times are said to overtake some men. This latter circumstance, with its own particular accompaniments, forming what may be called the secret part of the tragedy about to be narrated, never reached the ears of Captain Ahab or his mates. For that secret part of the story was unknown to the captain of the Town-Ho himself. It was the private property of three confederate white seamen of that ship, one of whom, it seems, communicated it to Tashtego with Romish injunctions of secrecy, but the following night Tashtego rambled in his sleep, 1 The ancient whale-cry upon first sighting a whale from the mast-1 still used by \vhalemen in hunting the famous Gallipagos terrapin. 306 THE TOWN-HO'S STORY 307 revealed so much of it in that way, that when he was wakened he could not well withhold the rest. Neverthe- less, so potent an influence did this thing have on those seamen in the Pequod who came to the full knowledge of it, and by such a strange delicacy, to call it so, were they governed in this matter, that they kept the secret among themselves so that it never transpired abaft the Peqiwd's mainmast. Interweaving in its proper place this darker thread with the story as publicly narrated on the ship, the whole of this strange affair I now proceed to put on lasting record. For my humour's sake, I shall preserve the style in which I once narrated it at Lima, to a lounging circle of my Spanish friends, one saint's eve, smoking upon the thick-gilt tiled piazza of the Golden Inn. Of those fine cavaliers, the young Dons, Pedro and Sebastian, were on the closer terms with me ; and hence the interluding questions they occasionally put, and which are duly answered at the time. 4 Some two years prior to my first learning the events which I am about rehearsing to you, gentlemen, the Town- Ho, sperm whaler of Nantucket, was cruising in your Pacific here, not very many days' sail westward from the eaves of this good Golden Inn. She was somewhere to the northward of the Line. One morning upon hand- ling the pumps, according to daily usage, it was observed that she made more water in her hold than common. They supposed a sword-fish had stabbed her, gentlemen. But the captain, having some unusual reason for believing that rare good luck awaited him in those latitudes, and therefore being very averse to quit them ; and the leak not being then considered at all dangerous, though, indeed, they could not find it after searching the hold as low down as was possible in rather heavy weather ; the ship still continued her cruisings, the mariners working 308 MOBY-DICK at the pumps at wide and easy intervals ; but no good luck came ; more days went by, and not only was the leak yet undiscovered, but it sensibly increased. So much so, that now taking some alarm, the captain, making all sail, stood away for the nearest harbour among the islands, there to have his hull hove out and repaired. 4 Though no small passage was before her, yet, if the commonest chance favoured, he did not at all fear that his ship would founder by the way, because his pumps were of the best, and being periodically relieved at them, those six-and-thirty men of his could easily keep the ship free ; never mind if the leak should double on her. In truth, well-nigh the whole of this passage being attended by very prosperous breezes, the Town-Ho had all but certainly arrived in perfect safety at her port without the occurrence of the least fatality, had it not been for the brutal overbearing of Radney, the mate, a Vineyarder, and the bitterly provoked vengeance of Steelkilt, a Lakeman and desperado from Buffalo. ' " Lakeman ! Buffalo ! Pray, what is a Lakeman, and where is Buffalo ? " said Don Sebastian, rising in his swinging mat of grass. ' On the eastern shore of our Lake Erie, Don ; but I crave your courtesy maybe, you shall soon hear further of all that. Now, gentlemen, in square-sail brigs and three-masted ships, well-nigh as large and stout as any that ever sailed out of your old Callao to far Manilla ; this Lakeman, in the land-locked heart of our America, had yet been nurtured by all those agrarian freebooting impressions popularly connected with the open ocean. For in their interflowing aggregate, those grand fresh- water seas of ours, Erie, and Ontario, and Huron, and Superior, and Michigan, possess an ocean -like expansive- ness, with many of the ocean's noblest traits ; with many of its rimmed varieties of races and of climes. They THE TOWN-HO'S STORY 309 contain round archipelagoes of romantic isles, even as the Polynesian waters do ; in large part, are shored by two great contrasting nations, as the Atlantic is ; they furnish long maritime approaches to our numerous territorial colonies from the East, dotted all round their banks ; ; here and there are frowned upon by batteries, and by the goat-like craggy guns of lofty Mackinaw ; they have heard the fleet thunderings of naval victories ; at intervals they yield their beaches to wild barbarians, whose red- painted faces flash from out their peltry wigwams ; for leagues and leagues are flanked by ancient and unentered forests, where the gaunt pines stand like serried lines of kings in Gothic genealogies ; those same woods harbour- ing wild Afric beasts of prey, and silken creatures whose exported furs give robes to Tartar emperors ; they mirror the paved capitals of Buffalo and Cleveland, as well as Winnebago villages ; they float alike the full-rigged merchant ship, the armed cruiser of the State, the steamer, and the beech canoe ; they are swept by Borean and dis- masting blasts as direful as any that lash the salted wave ; they know what shipwrecks are, for out of sight of land, however inland, they have drowned full many a midnight ship with all its shrieking crew. Thus, gentlemen, though an inlander, Steelkilt was wild-ocean born, and wild- ocean nurtured ; as much of an audacious mariner as any. And for Radney, though in his infancy he may have laid him down on the lone Nantucket beach, to nurse at his maternal sea ; though in after life he had long followed our austere Atlantic and your contemplative Pacific ; yet was he quite as vengeful and full of social quarrel as the backwoods seaman, fresh from the latitudes of buck-horn handled bowie-knives. Yet was this Nantucketer a man with some good-hearted traits ; and this Lakeman, a mariner, who though a sort of devil indeed, might yet by inflexible firmness, only tempered by that common 310 MOBY-DICK decency of human recognition which is the meanest slave's right ; thus treated, this Steelkilt had long been retained harmless and docile. At all events, he had proved so thus far ; but Radney was doomed and made mad, and Steelkilt but, gentlemen, you shall hear. ' It was not more than a day or two at the furthest after pointing her prow for her island haven, that the Town-Ho's leak seemed again increasing, but only so as to require an hour or more at the pumps every day. You must know that in a settled and civilised ocean like our Atlantic, for example, some skippers think little of pump- ing their whole way across it ; though of a still, sleepy night, should the officer of the deck happen to forget his duty in that respect, the probability would be that he and his shipmates would never again remember it, on account of all hands gently subsiding to the bottom. Nor in the solitary and savage seas far from you to the west- ward, gentlemen, is it altogether unusual for ships to keep clanging at their pump-handles in full chorus even for a voyage of considerable length ; that is, if it lie along a tolerably accessible coast, or if any other reasonable retreat is afforded them. It is only when a leaky vessel is in some very out-of-the-way part of those waters, some really landless latitude, that her captain begins to feel a little anxious. ' Much this way had it been with the Town-Ho \ so when her leak was found gaining once more, there was in truth some small concern manifested by several of her company ; especially by Radney the mate. He com- manded the upper sails to be well hoisted, sheeted home anew, and every way expanded to the breeze. Now this Radney, I suppose, was as little of a coward, and as little inclined to any sort of nervous apprehensiveness touching his own person, as any fearless, unthinking creature on land or on sea that you can conveniently imagine, gentle- THE TOWN-HO'S STORY 311 men. Therefore when he betrayed this solicitude about the safety of the ship, some of the seamen declared that it was only on account of his being a part owner in her. So when they were working that evening at the pumps, there was on this head no small gamesomeness slyly going on among them, as they stood with their feet continually overflowed by the rippling clear water clear as any mountain spring, gentlemen that bubbling from the pumps ran across the deck, and poured itself out in steady spouts at the lee scupper-holes. 4 Now, as you well know, it is not seldom the case hi this conventional world of ours watery or otherwise ; that when a person placed in command over his fellow- men finds one of them to be very significantly his superior in general pride of manhood, straightway against that man he conceives an unconquerable dislike and bitterness ; and if he have a chance he will pull down and pulverise that subaltern's tower, and make a little heap of dust of it. Be this conceit of mine as it may, gentlemen, at all events Steelkilt was a tall and noble animal with a head like a Roman, and a flowing golden beard like the tasselled housings of your last viceroy's snorting charger ; and a brain, and a heart, and a soul in him, gentlemen, which had made Steelkilt Charlemagne, had he been born son to Charlemagne's father. But Radney, the mate, was ugly as a mule ; yet as hardy, as stubborn, as malicious. He did not love Steelkilt, and Steelkilt knew it. ' Espying the mate drawing near as he was toiling at the pump with the rest, the Lakeman affected not to notice him, but unawed, went on with his gay banterings. ' " Ay, ay, my merry lads, it 's a lively leak this ; hold a cannikin, one of ye, and let 's have a taste. By the Lord, it 's worth bottling ! I tell ye what, men, old Rad's investment must go for it ! he had best cut away his part of the hull and tow it home. The fact is, boys, that sword- 312 MOBY-DICK fish only began the job ; he 's come back again with a gang of ship-carpenters, saw-fish, and file-fish, and what not ; and the whole posse of 'em are now hard at work cutting and slashing at the bottom ; making improve- ments, I suppose. If old Rad were here now, I 'd tell him to jump overboard and scatter 'em. They 're play- ing the devil with his estate, I can tell him. But he 's a simple old soul, Rad, and a beauty too. Boys, they say the rest of his property is invested in looking-glasses. I wonder if he 'd give a poor devil like me the model of his nose." ' " Damn your eyes ! what 's that pump stopping f or ? " roared Radney, pretending not to have heard the sailors' talk. " Thunder away at it ! " " Ay, ay, sir," said Steelkilt, merry as a cricket. " Lively, boys, lively, now ! " And with that the pump clanged like fifty fire-engines ; the men tossed their hats off to it, and ere long that peculiar gasping of the lungs was heard which denotes the fullest tension of life's utmost energies. ' Quitting the pump at last, with the rest of his band, the Lakeman went forward all panting, and sat himself down on the windlass ; his face fiery red, his eyes blood- shot, and wiping the profuse sweat from his brow. Now what cozening fiend it was, gentlemen, that possessed Radney to meddle with such a man in that corporeally exasperated state, I know not ; but so it happened. In- tolerably striding along the deck, the mate commanded him to get a broom and sweep down the planks, and also a shovel, and remove some offensive matters consequent upon allowing a pig to run at large. ' Now, gentlemen, sweeping a ship's deck at sea is a piece of household work which in all times but raging gales is regularly attended to every evening ; it has been known to be done in the case of ships actually foundering THE TOWN-HO'S STORY 313 at the time. Such, gentlemen, is the inflexibility of sea- usages and the instinctive love of neatness in seamen ; some of whom would not willingly drown without first washing their faces. But in all vessels this broom business is the prescriptive province of the boys, if boys there be aboard. Besides, it was the stronger men in the Town-Ho that had been divided into gangs, taking turns at the pumps ; and being the most athletic seaman of them all, Steelkilt had been regularly assigned captain of one of the gangs ; consequently he should have been freed from any trivial business not connected with truly nautical duties, such being the case with his comrades. I mention all these particulars so that you may understand exactly how this affair stood between the two men. ' But there was more than this : the order about the shovel was almost as plainly meant to sting and insult Steelkilt, as though Radney had spat in his face. Any man who has gone sailor in a whale-ship will understand this ; and all this and doubtless much more, the Lakeman fully comprehended when the mate uttered his command. But as he sat still for a moment, and as he steadfastly looked into the mate's malignant eye and perceived the stacks of powder-casks heaped up in him and the slow- match silently burning along toward them ; as he in- stinctively saw all this, that strange forbearance and un- willingness to stir up the deeper passionateness in any already ireful being a repugnance most felt, when felt at all, by really valiant men even when aggrieved this nameless phantom feeling, gentlemen, stole over Steelkilt. ' Therefore, in his ordinary tone, only a little broken by the bodily exhaustion he was temporarily in, he an- swered him saying that sweeping the deck was not his business, and he would not do it. And then, without at all alluding to the shovel, he pointed to three lads as the customary sweepers ; who, not being billeted at the 314 MOBY-DICK pumps, had done little or nothing all day. To this, Radney replied with an oath, in a most domineering and outrageous manner unconditionally reiterating his com- mand ; meanwhile advancing upon the still seated Lake- man, with an uplifted cooper's club hammer which he had snatched from a cask near by. ' Heated and irritated as he was by his spasmodic toil at the pumps, for all his first nameless feeling of forbear- ance the sweating Steelkilt could but ill brook this bearing in the mate ; but somehow still smothering the conflagra- tion within him, without speaking he remained doggedly rooted to his seat, till at last the incensed Radney shook the hammer within a few inches of his face, furiously commanding him to do his bidding. 4 Steelkilt rose, and slowly retreating round the wind- lass, steadily followed by the mate with his menacing hammer, deliberately repeated his intention not to obey. Seeing, however, that his forbearance had not the slightest effect, by an awful and unspeakable intimation with his twisted hand he warned off the foolish and infatuated man ; but it was to no purpose. And in this way the two went once slowly round the windlass ; when, resolved at last no longer to retreat, bethinking him that he had now forborne as much as comported with his humour, the Lakeman paused on the hatches and thus spoke to the officer : 1 " Mr. Radney, I will not obey you. Take that hammer away, or look to yourself." But the predestin- ated mate coming still closer to him, where the Lakeman stood fixed, now shook the heavy hammer within an inch of his teeth ; meanwhile repeating a string of insufferable maledictions. Retreating not the thousandth part of an inch ; stabbing him in the eye with the unflinching poniard of his glance, Steelkilt, clenching his right hand behind him and creepingly drawing it back, told his perse- THE TOWN-HO'S STORY 315 cutor that if the hammer but grazed his cheek he (Steel- kilt) would murder him. But, gentlemen, the fool had been branded for the slaughter by the gods. Immediately the hammer touched the cheek ; the next instant the lower jaw of the mate was stove in his head ; he fell on the hatch spouting blood like a whale. * Ere the cry could go aft Steelkilt was shaking one of the backstays leading far aloft to where two of his com- rades were standing their mast-heads. They were both Canallers. ' " Canallers ! " cried Don Pedro. " We have seen many whale -ships in our harbours, but never heard of your Canallers. Pardon : who and what are they ? " ' " Canallers, Don, are the boatmen belonging to our grand Erie Canal. You must have heard of it." ' " Nay, Senor ; hereabouts in this dull, warm, most lazy, and hereditary land, we know but little of your vigorous North." ' " Ay ? Well then, Don, refill my cup. Your chicha 's very fine ; and ere proceeding further I will tell ye what our Canallers are ; for such information may throw side-light upon my story." 4 For three hundred and sixty miles, gentlemen, through the entire breadth of the state of New York ; through numerous populous cities and most thriving villages ; through long, dismal, uninhabited swamps, and affluent, cultivated fields, unrivalled for fertility ; by billiard- room and bar-room ; through the holy-of-holies of great forests ; on Roman arches over Indian rivers ; through sun and shade ; by happy hearts or broken ; through all the wide contrasting scenery of those noble Mohawk counties ; and especially, by rows of snow-white chapels, whose spires stand almost like milestones, flows one con- tinual stream of Venetianly corrupt and often lawless life. There 's your true Ashantee, gentlemen ; there howl your 316 MOBY-DICK pagans ; where you ever find them, next door to you ; under the long-flung shadow, and the snug patronising lee of churches. For by some curious fatality, as it is often noted of your metropolitan freebooters that they ever encamp around the halls of justice, so sinners, gentle- men, most abound in holiest vicinities. 4 " Is that a friar passing ? " said Don Pedro, looking downward into the crowded plaza, with humorous concern. ' " Well for our northern friend, Dame Isabella's In- quisition wanes in Lima," laughed Don Sebastian. " Pro- ceed, Senor." ' " A moment ! Pardon ! " cried another of the com- pany. " In the name of all us Limeese, I but desire to express to you, sir sailor, that we have by no means over- looked your delicacy in not substituting present Lima for distant Venice in your corrupt comparison. Oh ! do not bow and look surprised ; you know the proverb all along this coast 'Corrupt as Lima.' It but bears out your saying, too ; churches more plentiful than billiard- tables, and forever open and ' Corrupt as Lima.' So, too, Venice ; I have been there ; the holy city of the blessed evangelist, St. Mark ! St. Dominic, purge it ! Your cup ! Thanks : here I refill ; now, you pour out again." 1 Freely depicted in his own vocation, gentlemen, the Canaller would make a fine dramatic hero, so abundantly and picturesquely wicked is he. Like Mark Antony, for days and days along his green-turfed, flowery Nile, he indolently floats, openly toying with his red-cheeked Cleopatra, ripening his apricot thigh upon the sunny deck. But ashore, all this effeminacy is dashed. The brigandish guise which the Canaller so proudly sports, his slouched and gaily -ribboned hat, betoken his grand features. A terror to the smiling innocence of the villages through THE TOWN-HO'S STORY 317 which he floats ; his swart visage and bold swagger are not unshunned in cities. Once a vagabond on his own canal, I have received good turns from one of these Canallers ; I thank him heartily ; would fain be not ungrateful ; but it is often one of the prime redeeming qualities of your man of violence, that at times he has as stiff an arm to back a poor stranger in a strait, as to plunder a wealthy one. In sum, gentlemen, what the wildness of this canal life is, is emphatically evinced by this ; that our wild whale-fishery contains so many of its most finished graduates, and that scarce any race of mankind, except Sydney men, are so much distrusted by our whaling-captains. Nor does it at all diminish the curiousness of this matter, that to many thousands of our rural boys and young men born along its line, the pro- bationary life of the Grand Canal furnishes the sole tran- sition between quietly reaping in a Christian corn-field, and recklessly ploughing the waters of the most barbaric seas. ' " I see ! I see ! " impetuously exclaimed Don Pedro, spilling his chicha upon his silvery ruffles. " No need to travel ! The world 5 s one Lima. I had thought, now, that at your temperate North the generations were cold and holy as the hills. But the story." ' I left off, gentlemen, where the Lakeman shook the backstay. Hardly had he done so, when he was sur- rounded by the three junior mates and the four har- pooneers, who all crowded him to the deck. But sliding down the ropes like baleful comets, the two Canallers rushed into the uproar, and sought to drag their man out of it toward the forecastle. Others of the sailors joined with them in this attempt, and a twisted turmoil ensued ; while standing out of harm's way, the valiant captain danced up and down with a whale-pike, calling upon his officers to manhandle that atrocious scoundrel, and smoke 318 MOBY-DICK him along to the quarter-deck. At intervals, he ran close up to the revolving border of the confusion, and prying into the heart of it with his pike, sought to prick out the object of his resentment. But Steelkilt and his desper- adoes were too much for them all ; they succeeded in gaining the forecastle deck, where, hastily slewing about three or four large casks in a line with the windlass, these sea-Parisians entrenched themselves behind the barricade. ' " Come out of that, ye pirates ! " roared the captain, now menacing them with a pistol in each hand, just brought to him by the steward. " Come out of that, ye cut -throats ! " ' Steelkilt leaped on the barricade, and striding up and down there, defied the worst the pistols could do ; but gave the captain to understand distinctly, that his (Steel- kilt's) death would be the signal for a murderous mutiny on the part of all hands. Fearing in his heart lest this might prove but too true, the captain a little desisted, but still commanded the insurgents instantly to return to their duty. ' " Will you promise not to touch us, if we do ? " demanded their ringleader. ' " Turn to ! turn to ! I make no promise ; to your duty ! Do you want to sink the ship, by knocking off at a time like this ? Turn to ! " and he once more raised a pistol. ' " Sink the ship ! " cried Steelkilt. " Ay, let her sink. Not a man of us turns to, unless you swear not to raise a rope-yarn against us. What say ye, men 1 " turning to his comrades. A fierce cheer was their response. ' The Lakeman now patrolled the barricade, all the while keeping his eye on the captain, and jerking out such sentences as these : "It 's not our fault ; we didn't want it ; I told him to take his hammer away ; it was boy 3 s business ; he might have known me before this ; THE TOWN-HO'S STORY 319 I told him not to prick the buffalo ; I believe I have broken a finger here against his cursed jaw ; ain't those mincing- knives down in the forecastle there, men ? look to those handspikes, my hearties. Captain, by God, look to yourself ; say the word ; don't be a fool ; forget it all ; we are ready to turn to ; treat us decently, and we 're your men ; but we won't be flogged." ' " Turn to ! I make no promises, turn to, I say ! " ' " Look ye, now," cried the Lake man, flinging out his arm toward him, " there are a few of us here (and I am one of them) who have shipped for the cruise, d' ye see ; now as you well know, sir, we can claim our discharge as soon as the anchor is down ; so we don't want a row ; it 's not our interest ; we want to be peaceable ; we are ready to work, but we won't be flogged." ' " Turn to ! " roared the captain. * Steelkilt glanced round him a moment, and then said : " I tell you what it is now, captain, rather than kill ye, and be hung for such a shabby rascal, we won't lift a hand against ye unless ye attack us ; but till you say the word about not flogging us, we don't do a hand's turn." 6 " Down into the forecastle then, down with ye, I '11 keep ye there till ye 're sick of it. Down ye go." ' " Shall we ? " cried the ringleader to his men. Most of them were against it ; but at length, in obedience to Steelkilt, they preceded him down into their dark den, growlingly disappearing, like bears into a cave. ' As the Lakeman's bare head was just level with the planks, the captain and his posse leaped the barricade, and rapidly drawing over the slide of the scuttle, planted their group of hands upon it, and loudly called for the steward to bring the heavy brass padlock belonging to the companion-way. Then opening the slide a little, the captain whispered something down the crack, closed it, 320 MOBY-DICK and turned the key upon them ten in number leaving on deck some twenty or more, who thus far had remained neutral. ' All night a wide-awake watch was kept by all the officers, forward and aft, especially about the forecastle scuttle and fore-hatchway : at which last place it was feared the insurgents might emerge, after breaking through the bulkhead below. But the hours of darkness passed in peace ; the men who still remained at their duty toiling hard at the pumps, whose clinking and clanking at inter- vals through the dreary night dismally resounded through the ship. ' At sunrise the captain went forward, and knocking on the deck, summoned the prisoners to work ; but with a yell they refused. Water was then lowered down to them, and a couple of handfuls of biscuit were tossed after it ; when again turning the key upon them and pocketing it, the captain returned to the quarter-deck. Twice every day for three days this was repeated ; but on the fourth morning a confused wrangling, and then a scuffling was heard, as the customary summons was delivered ; and suddenly four men burst up from the forecastle, saying they were ready to turn to. The fetid closeness of the ah*, and a famishing diet, united perhaps to some fears of ultimate retribution, had constrained them to surrender at discretion. Emboldened by this, the captain reiterated his demand to the rest, but Steelkilt shouted up to him a terrific hint to stop his babbling and betake himself where he belonged. On the fifth morning three others of the mutineers bolted up into the air from the desperate arms below that sought to restrain them. Only three were left. ' " Better turn to, now ? " said the captain, with a heartless jeer. ' " Shut us up again, will ye ! " cried Steelkilt. THE TOWN-HO'S STORY 321 4 " Oh ! certainly," said the captain, and the key clicked. ' It was at this point, gentlemen, that enraged by the defection of seven of his former associates, and stung by the mocking voice that had last hailed him, and maddened by his long entombment in a place as black as the bowels of despair ; it was then that Steelkilt proposed to the two Canallers, thus far apparently of one mind with him, to burst out of their hole at the next summoning of the garrison ; and armed with their keen mincing-knives (long, crescentic, heavy implements with a handle at each end) run amuck from the bowsprit to the taffrail ; and if by any devilishness of desperation possible, seize the ship. For himself, he would do this, he said, whether they joined him or not. That was the last night he should spend in that den. But the scheme met with no opposition on the part of the other two ; they swore they were ready for that, or for any other mad thing, for anything in short but a surrender. And what was more, they each insisted upon being the first man on deck, when the time to make the rush should come. But to this their leader as fiercely objected, reserving that priority for himself ; particularly as his two comrades would not yield, the one to the other, in the matter ; and both of them could not be first, for the ladder would but admit one man at a time. And here, gentlemen, the foul play of these miscreants must come out. ' Upon hearing the frantic project of their leader, each in his own separate soul had suddenly lighted, it would seem, upon the same piece of treachery, namely : to be foremost in breaking out, in order to be the first of the three, though the last of the ten, to surrender ; and there- by secure whatever small chance of pardon such conduct might merit. But when Steelkilt made known his deter- mination still to lead them to the last, they in some way, by some subtle chemistry of villainy, mixed their before secret VOL. i, x 322 MOBY-DICK treacheries together ; and when their leader fell into a doze, verbally opened their souls to each other in three sentences ; and bound the sleeper with cords, and gagged him with cords ; and shrieked out for the captain at midnight. ' Thinking murder at hand, and smelling in the dark for the blood, he and all his armed mates and harpooneers rushed for the forecastle. In a few minutes the scuttle was opened, and, bound hand and foot, the still struggling ringleader was shoved up into the air by his perfidious allies, who at once claimed the honour of securing a man who had been fully ripe for murder. But all these were collared, and dragged along the deck like dead cattle ; and, side by side, were seized up into the mizen rigging, like three quarters of meat, and there they hung till morning. " Damn ye," cried the captain, pacing to and fro before them, " the vultures would not touch ye, ye villains ! " ' At sunrise he summoned all hands ; and separating those who had rebelled from those who had taken no part in the mutiny, he told the former that he had a good mind to flog them all round thought, upon the whole, he would do so he ought to justice demanded it ; but for the present, considering their timely surrender, he would let them go with a reprimand, which he accordingly administered in the vernacular. ' " But as for you, ye carrion rogues," turning to the three men in the rigging " for you, I mean to mince ye up for the try -pots " ; and, seizing a rope, he applied it with all his might to the backs of the two traitors, till they yelled no more, but lifelessly hung their heads side- ways, as the two crucified thieves are drawn. 4 " My wrist is sprained with ye ! " he cried, at last ; " but there is still rope enough left for you, my fine bantam, that wouldn't give up. Take that gag from his mouth, and let us hear what he can say for himself." THE TOWN-HO'S STORY 323 ' For a moment the exhausted mutineer made a tremu- lous motion of his cramped jaws, and then painfully twisting round his head, said in a sort of hiss, " What I say is this and mind it well if you flog me, I murder you ! " ' " Say ye so ? then see how ye frighten me " and the captain drew off with the rope to strike. ' " Best not," hissed the Lakeman. ' " But I must," and the rope was once more drawn back for the stroke. * Steelkilt here hissed out something, inaudible to all but the captain ; who, to the amazement of all hands, started back, paced the deck rapidly two or three times, and then suddenly throwing down his rope, said, " I won't do it let him go cut him down : d' ye hear ? " ' But as the junior mates were hurrying to execute the order, a pale man, with a bandaged head, arrested them Radney the chief mate. Ever since the blow, he had lain in his berth ; but that morning, hearing the tumult on the deck, he had crept out, and thus far had watched the whole scene. Such was the state of his mouth, that he could hardly speak ; but mumbling something about his being willing and able to do what the captain dared not attempt, he snatched the rope and advanced to his pinioned foe. * " You are a coward ! " hissed the Lakeman. ' " So I am, but take that." The mate was in the very act of striking, when another hiss stayed his uplifted arm. He paused : and then pausing no more, made good his word, spite of Steelkilt 's threat, whatever that might have been. The three men were then cut down, all hands were turned to, and, sullenly worked by the moody seamen, the iron pumps clanged as before. ' Just after dark that day, when one watch had retired below, a clamour was heard in the forecastle : and the 324 MOBY-DICK two trembling traitors running up, besieged the cabin door, saying they durst not consort with the crew. En- treaties, cuffs, and kicks could not drive them back, so at their own instance they were put down in the ship's run for salvation. Still, no sign of mutiny reappeared among the rest. On the contrary, it seemed, that mainly at Steelkilt's instigation, they had resolved to maintain the strictest peacefulness, obey all orders to the last, and, when the ship reached port, desert her in a body. But in order to ensure the speediest end to the voyage, they all agreed to another thing namely, not to sing out for whales, in case any should be discovered. For, spite of her leak, and spite of all her other perils, the Town-Ho still maintained her mast-heads, and her captain was just as willing to lower for a fish that moment, as on the day his craft first struck the cruising -ground ; and Radney the mate was quite as ready to change his berth for a boat, and with his bandaged mouth seek to gag in death the vital jaw of the whale. ' But though the Lakeman had induced the seamen to adopt this sort of passiveness in their conduct, he kept his own counsel (at least till all was over) concerning his own proper and private revenge upon the man who had stung him in the ventricles of his heart. He was in Radney the chief mate's watch ; and as if the infatuated man sought to run more than half-way to meet his doom, after the scene at the rigging, he insisted, against the express counsel of the captain, upon resuming the head of his watch at night. Upon this, and one or two other circumstances, Steelkilt systematically built the plan of his revenge. ' During the night, Radney had an unseamanlike way of sitting on the bulwarks of the quarter-deck, and leaning his arm upon the gunwale of the boat which was hoisted up there, a little above the ship's side. In this attitude, THE TOWN-HO'S STORY 325 it was well known, he sometimes dozed. There was a considerable vacancy between the boat and the ship, and down between this was the sea. Steelkilt calculated his time, and found that his next trick at the helm would come round at two o'clock, in the morning of the third day from that in which he had been betrayed. At his leisure, he employed the interval in braiding something very carefully in his watches below. ' " What are you making there ? " said a shipmate. c " What do you think ? what does it look like ? " ' " Like a lanyard for your bag ; but it 's an odd one, seems to me." ' " Yes, rather oddish," said the Lakeman, holding it at arm's length before him ; " but I think it will answer. Shipmate, I haven't enough twine, have you any ? " ' But there was none in the forecastle. ' " Then I must get some from old Had " ; and he rose to go aft. ' " You don't mean to go a-begging to him I " said a sailor. ' " Why not ? Do you think he won't do me a turn, when it 's to help himself in the end, shipmate ? " and going to the mate, he looked at him quietly, and asked him for some twine to mend his hammock. It was given him neither twine nor lanyard were seen again ; but the next night an iron ball, closely netted, partly rolled from the pocket of the Lakeman's monkey-jacket, as he was tucking the coat into his hammock for a pillow. Twenty-four hours after, his trick at the silent helm nigh to the man who was apt to doze over the grave always ready dug to the seaman's hand that fatal hour was then to come ; and in the fore -ordaining soul of Steelkilt, the mate was already stark and stretched as a corpse, with his forehead crushed in. 4 But, gentlemen, a fool saved the would-be murderer 326 MOBY-DICK from the bloody deed he had planned. Yet complete revenge he had, and without being the avenger. For by a mysterious fatality, Heaven itself seemed to step in to take out of his hands into its own the damning thing he would have done. 1 It was just between daybreak and sunrise of the morning of the second day, when they were washing down the decks, that a stupid Teneriffe man, drawing water in the main-chains, all at once shouted out, " There she rolls ! there she rolls ! " Jesu, what a whale ! It was Mahv^JQick. 4 " Moby-Dick ! " cried Don Sebastian ; " St. Dominic ! sir sailor, but do whales have christenings ? Whom call you Moby-Dick ? " 4 " A very white, and famous, and most deadly immortal monster, Don ; but that would be too long a story." 4 " How ? how ? " cried all the young Spaniards, crowding. ' " Nay, Dons, Dons nay, nay ! I cannot rehearse that now. Let me get more into the air, sirs." 4 " Chicha ! the chicha ! " cried Don Pedro ; " our vigorous friend looks faint ; fill up his empty glass ! " 4 No need, gentlemen ; one moment, and I proceed. Now, gentlemen, so suddenly perceiving the snowy whale within fifty yards of the ship forgetful of the compact among the crew in the excitement of the moment, the Teneriffe man had instinctively and involuntarily lifted his voice for the monster, though for some little time past it had been plainly beheld from the three sullen mast-heads. All was now a frenzy. " The White Whale the White Whale ! " was the cry from captain, mates, and har- pooneers, who, undeterred by fearful rumours, were all anxious to capture so famous and precious a fish ; while the dogged crew eyed askance, and with curses, the appal- ling beauty of the vast milky mass, that lit up by a hori- zontal spangling sun, shifted and glistened like a living THE TOWN-HO'S STORY 327 opal in the blue morning sea. Gentlemen, a strange fatality pervades the whole career of these events, as if verily mapped out before the world itself was charted. The mutineer was the bowsman of the mate, and when fast to a fish, it was his duty to sit next him, while Radney stood up with his lance in the prow, and haul in or slacken the line, at the word of command. Moreover, when the four boats were lowered, the mate's got the start ; and none howled more fiercely with delight than did Steelkilt, as he strained at his oar. After a stiff pull, their har- pooneer got fast, and, spear in hand, Radney sprang to the bow. He was always a furious man, it seems, in a boat. And now his bandaged cry was, to beach him on the whale's topmost back. Nothing loath, his bows- man hauled him up and up, through a blinding foam that blent two whitenesses together ; till of a sudden the boat struck as against a sunken ledge, and keeling over, spilled out the standing mate. That instant, as he fell on the whale's slippery back, the boat righted, and was dashed aside by the swell, while Radney was tossed over into the sea, on the other flank of the whale . He struck out through the spray, and, for an instant, was dimly seen through that veil, wildly seeking to remove himself from the eye of Moby-Dick. But the whale rushed round in a sudden maelstrom ; seized the swimmer between his jaws ; and rearing high up with him, plunged headlong again, and went down. ' Meantime, at the first tap of the boat's bottom, the Lakeman had slackened the line, so as to drop astern from the whirlpool ; calmly looking on, he thought his own thoughts. But a sudden, terrific, downward jerking of the boat, quickly brought his knife to the line. He cut it ; and the whale was free. But, at some distance, Moby-Dick rose again, with some tatters of Radney 's red woollen shirt caught in the teeth that had destroyed 328 MOBY-DICK him. All four boats gave chase again ; but the whale eluded them, and finally wholly disappeared. ' In good time, the Town-Ho reached her port a savage, solitary place where no civilised creature resided. There, headed by the Lake man, all but five or six of the foremast-men deliberately deserted among the palms ; eventually, as it turned out, seizing a large double war- canoe of the savages, and setting sail for some other harbour. 4 The ship's company being reduced to but a handful, the captain called upon the Islanders to assist him in the laborious business of heaving down the ship to stop the leak. But to such unresting vigilance over their danger- ous allies was this small band of whites necessitated, both by night and by day, and so extreme was the hard work they underwent, that upon the vessel being ready again for sea, they were in such a weakened condition that the captain durst not put off with them in so heavy a vessel. After taking counsel with his officers, he anchored the ship as far off shore as possible ; loaded and ran out his two cannon from the bows ; stacked his muskets on the poop ; and warning the Islanders not to approach the ship at their peril, took one man with him, and setting the sail of his best whale-boat, steered straight before the wind for Tahiti, five hundred miles distant, to procure a reinforcement to his crew. ' On the fourth day of the sail, a large canoe was descried, which seemed to have touched at a low isle of corals. He steered away from it ; but the savage craft bore down on him ; and soon the voice of Steelkilt hailed him to heave to, or he would run him under water. The captain presented a pistol. With one foot on each prow of the yoked war-canoes, the Lakeman laughed him to scorn ; assuring him that if the pistol so much as clicked in the lock, he would bury him in bubbles and foam. THE TOWN-HO'S STORY 329 ' " What do you want of me ? " cried the captain. ' " Where are you bound ? and for what are you bound ? " demanded Steelkilt ; "no lies." ' " I am bound to Tahiti for more men." ' " Very good. Let me board you a moment I come in peace." With that he leaped from the canoe, swam to the boat ; and climbing the gunwale, stood face to face with the captain. " Cross your arms, sir ; throw back your head. Now, repeat after me. As soon as Steelkilt leaves me, I swear to beach this boat on yonder island, and remain there six days. If I do not, may lightnings strike me ! " ' " A pretty scholar," laughed the Lakeman. " Adios, Senor ! " and leaping into the sea, he swam back to his comrades. ' Watching the boat till it was fairly beached, and drawn up to the roots of the cocoa-nut trees, Steelkilt made sail again, and in due time arrived at Tahiti, his own place of destination. There, luck befriended him ; two ships were about to sail for France, and were provi- dentially in want of precisely that number of men which the sailor headed. They embarked ; and so forever got the start of their former captain, had he been at all minded to work them legal retribution. ' Some ten days after the French ships sailed, the whale- boat arrived, and the captain was forced to enlist some of the more civilised Tahitians, who had been somewhat used to the sea. Chartering a small native schooner, he returned with them to his vessel ; and finding all right there, again resumed his cruisings. ' Where Steelkilt now is, gentlemen, none know ; but upon the island of Nantucket, the widow of Radney still turns to the sea which refuses to give up its dead ; still in dreams sees the awful White Whale that destroyed him. * * * 330 MOBY-DICK ' " Are you through ? " said Don Sebastian quietly. 1 " I am, Don." 6 " Then I entreat you, tell me if to the best of your own convictions, this your story is in substance really true ? It is so passing wonderful ! Did you get it from an unquestionable source ? Bear with me if I seem to press." ' " Also bear with all of us, sir sailor ; for we all join in Don Sebastian's suit," cried the company, with exceed- ing interest. ' " Is there a copy of the Holy Evangelists hi the Golden Inn, gentlemen ? " ' " Nay," said Don Sebastian ; " but I know a worthy priest near by, who will quickly procure one for me. I go for it ; but are you well advised ? this may grow too serious." ' " Will you be so good as to bring the priest also, Don ? " ' " Though there are no Auto-da-Fes in Lima now," said one of the company to another ; "I fear our sailor friend runs risk of the archiepiscopacy. Let us withdraw more out of the moonlight. I see no need of this." ' " Excuse me for running after you, Don Sebastian ; but may I also beg that you will be particular in procuring the largest -sized Evangelists you can." ******* ' " This is the priest, he brings you the Evangelists," said Don Sebastian gravely, returning with a tall and solemn figure. ' " Let me remove my hat. Now, venerable priest, further into the light, and hold the Holy Book before me that I may touch it. ' " So help me Heaven, and on my honour the story I have told ye, gentlemen, is in substance and its great items, true. I know it to be true ; it happened on this ball ; I trod the ship ; I knew the crew ; I have seen and talked with Steelkilt since the death of Radney." CHAPTER LV OF THE MONSTROUS PICTURES OF WHALES I SHALL ere long paint to you as well as one can without canvas, something like the true form of the whale as he actually appears to the eye of the whaleman when in his own absolute body the whale is moored alongside the whale -ship so that he can be fairly stepped upon there. It may be worth while, therefore, previously to advert to those curious imaginary portraits of him which even down to the present day confidently challenge the faith of the landsman. It is time to set the world right in this matter, by proving such pictures of the whale all wrong. It may be that the primal source of all those pictorial delusions will be found among the oldest Hindu, Egyptian, and Grecian sculptures. For ever since those inventive but unscrupulous times when on the marble panellings of temples, the pedestals of statues, and on shields, medallions, cups, and coins, the dolphin was drawn in scales of chain-armour like Saladin's, and a helmeted head like St. George's ; ever since then has something of the same sort of licence prevailed, not only in most popular pictures of the whale, but in many scientific presentations of him. Now, by all odds, the most ancient extant portrait anyways purporting to be the whale's, is to be found in the famous cavern -pagoda of Elephanta, in India. The Brahmins maintain that in the almost endless sculptures of that immemorial pagoda, all the trades and pursuits, 331 332 MOBY-DICK every conceivable avocation of man, were prefigured ages before any of them actually came into being. No wonder, then, that in some sort our noble profession of whaling should have been there shadowed forth. The Hindu whale referred to, occurs in a separate department of the wall, depicting the incarnation of Vishnu in the form of leviathan, learnedly known as the Matse Avatar. But though this sculpture is half man and half whale, so as only to give the tail of the latter, yet that small section of him is all wrong. It looks more like the tapering tail of an anaconda a than the broad palms of the true whale's majestic flukes. But go to the old galleries, and look now at a great Christian painter's portrait of this fish ; for he succeeds no better than the antediluvian Hindu. It is Guide's picture of Perseus rescuing Andromeda from the sea- monster or whale. Where did Guido get the model of such a strange creature as that ? Nor does Hogarth, in painting the same scene in his own ' Perseus Descending,' make out one whit better. The huge corpulence of that Hogarthian monster undulates on the surface, scarcely drawing one inch of water. It has a sort of howdah on its back, and its distended tusked mouth into which the billows are rolling, might be taken for the Traitors' Gate leading from the Thames by water into the Tower. Then, there are the Prodromus whales of old Scotch Sibbald, and Jonah's whale, as depicted in the prints of old Bibles and the cuts of old primers. What shall be said of these ? As for the bookbinder's whale winding like a vine-stalk round the stock of a descending anchor as stamped and gilded on the backs and title-pages of many books both old and new that is a very picturesque but purely fabulous creature, imitated, I take it, from the like figures on antique vases. Though universally denominated a dolphin, I nevertheless call this bookbinder's fish an MONSTROUS PICTURES OF WHALES 333 attempt at a whale ; because it was so intended when the device was first introduced. It was introduced by an old Italian publisher somewhere about the 15th century, during the Revival of Learning ; and in those days, and even down to a comparatively late period, dolphins were popularly supposed to be a species of the leviathan. In the vignettes and other embellishments of some ancient books you will at times meet with very curious touches at the whale, where all manner of spouts, jets d'eau, hot springs and cold, Saratoga and Baden-Baden, come bubbling up from his unexhausted brain. In the title-page of the original edition of the Advancement of Learning you will find some curious whales. But quitting all these unprofessional attempts, let us glance at those pictures of leviathan purporting to be sober, scientific delineations, by those who know. In old Harris's collection of voyages there are some plates of whales extracted from a Dutch book of voyages, A.D. 1671, entitled A Whaling Voyage to Spitzbergen in the ship Jonas in the Whale, Peter Peterson of Friesland, master. In one of those plates the whales, like great rafts of logs, are represented lying among ice-isles, with white bears running over their living backs. In another plate, the prodigious blunder is made of representing the whale with perpendicular flukes. Then again, there is an imposing quarto, written by one Captain Colnett, a post-captain in the English navy, entitled A Voyage round Cape Horn into the South Seas, for the purpose of extending the Spermaceti Whale Fisheries. In this book is an outline purporting to be a ' Picture of a Physeter or Spermaceti whale, drawn by scale from one killed on the coast of Mexico, August 1793, and hoisted on deck.' I doubt not the captain had this veracious picture taken for the benefit of his marines. To mention but one thing about it, let me say that it has an eye which 334 MOBY-DICK applied, according to the accompanying scale, to a full- grown sperm whale, would make the eye of that whale a bow- window some five feet long. Ah, my gallant cap- tain, why did ye not give us Jonah looking out of that eye ! Nor are the most conscientious compilations of Natural History for the benefit of the young and tender, free from the same heinousness of mistake. Look at that popular work Goldsmith's Animated Nature. In the abridged London edition of 1807, there are plates of an alleged 'whale' and a 'narwhale.' I do not wish to seem inelegant, but this unsightly whale looks much like an amputated sow ; and, as for the nar whale, one glimpse at it is enough to amaze one, that in this nineteenth century such a hippogrrff could be palmed for genuine upon any intelligent public of schoolboys. Then, again, in 1825, Bernard Germain, Count de Lace- pede, a great naturalist, published a scientific systematised whale book, wherein are several pictures of the different species of the leviathan. All these are not only incorrect, but the picture of the Mysticetus or Greenland whale (that is to say, the right whale), even Scoresby, a long- experienced man as touching that species, declares not to have its counterpart in nature. But the placing of the cap -sheaf to all this blundering business was reserved for the scientific Frederick Cuvier, brother to the famous Baron. In 1836, he published a Natural History of Whales, in which he gives what he calls a picture of the sperm whale. Before showing that picture to any Nantucketer, you had best provide for your summary retreat from Nantucket. In a word, Frederick Cuvier's sperm whale is not a sperm whale, but a squash. Of course, he never had the benefit of a whaling voyage (such men seldom have), but whence he derived that picture, who can tell ? Perhaps he got it as his scientific predecessor in the same field, Desmarest, MONSTROUS PICTURES OF WHALES 335 got one of his authentic abortions ; that is, from a Chinese drawing. And what sort of lively lads with the pencil those Chinese are, many queer cups and saucers inform us. As for the sign-painters' whales seen in the streets hanging over the shops of oil-dealers, what shall be said of them ? They are generally Richard in. whales, with dromedary humps, and very savage ; breakfasting on three or four sailor tarts, that is whale-boats full of mariners : their deformities floundering in seas of blood and blue paint. But these manifold mistakes in depicting the whale are not so very surprising after all. Consider ! Most of the scientific drawings have been taken from the stranded fish ; and these are about as correct as a drawing of a wrecked ship, with broken back, would correctly repre- sent the noble animal itself in all its undashed pride of hull and spars. Though elephants have stood for their full-lengths, the living leviathan has never yet fairly floated himself for his portrait. The living whale, in his full majesty and significance, is only to be seen at sea in unfathomable waters ; and afloat the vast bulk of him is out of sight, like a launched line-of-battle ship ; and out of that element it is a thing eternally impossible for mortal man to hoist him bodily into the air, so as to preserve all his mighty swells and undulations. And, not to speak of the highly presumable difference of con- tour between a young sucking whale and a full-grown Platonian leviathan ; yet, even in the case of one of those young sucking whales hoisted to a ship's deck, such is then the outlandish, eel-like, limbered, varying shape of him, that his precise expression the devil himself could not catch. But it may be fancied, that from the naked skeleton of the stranded whale, accurate hints may be derived touching his true form. Not at all. For it is one of the 336 MOBY-DICK more curious things about this leviathan, that his skele- ton gives very little idea of his general shape. Though Jeremy Bentham's skeleton, which hangs for candelabra in the library of one of his executors, correctly conveys the idea of a burly -browed utilitarian old gentleman, with all Jeremy's other leading personal characteristics ; yet nothing of this kind could be inferred from any leviathan's articulated bones. In fact, as the great Hunter says, the mere skeleton of the whale bears the same relation to the fully invested and padded animal as the insect does to the chrysalis that so roundingly envelops it. This peculi- arity is strikingly evinced in the head, as in some part of this book will be incidentally shown. It is also very curiously displayed in the side fin, the bones of which almost exactly answer to the bones of the human hand, minus only the thumb. This fin has four regular bone- fingers, the index, middle, ring, and little finger. But all these are permanently lodged in their fleshy covering, as the human fingers in an artificial covering. ' However recklessly the whale may sometimes serve us/ said humorous Stubb one day, ' he can never be truly said to handle us without mittens.' For all these reasons, then, any way you may look at it, you must needs conclude that the great leviathan is that one creature in the world which must remain unpainted to the last. True, one portrait may hit the mark much nearer than another, but none can hit it with any very considerable degree of exactness. So there is no earthly way of finding out precisely what the whale really looks like. And the only mode in which you can derive even a tolerable idea of his living contour, is by going a-whaling yourself ; but by so doing, you run no small risk of being eternally stove and sunk by him. Wherefore, it seems to me you had best not be too fastidious in your curiosity touching this leviathan. CHAPTER LVI OF THE LESS ERRONEOUS PICTURES OF WHALES, AND THE TRUE PICTURES OF WHALING SCENES IN connection with the monstrous pictures of whales, I am strongly tempted here to enter upon those still more monstrous stories of them which are to be found in certain books, both ancient and modern, especially hi Pliny, Purchas, Hakluyt, Harris, Cuvier, etc. But I pass that matter by. I know of only four published outlines of the great sperm whale : Colnett's, Huggins's, Frederick Cuvier 's, and Beale's. In the previous chapter Colnett and Cuvier have been referred to. Huggins's is far better than theirs ; but, by great odds, Beale's is the best. All Beale's draw- ings of this whale are good, excepting the middle figure in the picture of three whales in various attitudes, capping his second chapter. His frontispiece, boats attacking sperm whales, though no doubt calculated to excite the civil scepticism of some parlour men, is admirably correct and lifelike in its general effect. Some of the sperm whale drawings in J. Ross Browne are pretty correct in contour ; but they are wretchedly engraved. That is not his fault, though. Of the right whale, the best outline pictures are in Scoresby ; but they are drawn on too small a scale to convey a desirable impression. He has but one picture of whaling scenes, and this is a sad deficiency, because it is by such pictures only, when at all well done, that you VOL. I. Y 338 MOBY-DICK can derive anything like a truthful idea of the living whale as seen by his living hunters. But, taken for all in all, by far the finest, though in some details not the most correct, presentations of whales and whaling scenes to be anywhere found, are two large French engravings, well executed, and taken from paint- ings by one Garnery. Respectively, they represent attacks on the sperm and right whale. In the first en- graving a noble sperm whale is depicted in full majesty of might, just risen beneath the boat from the profundities of the ocean, and bearing high in the air upon his back the terrific wreck of the stoven planks. The prow of the boat is partially unbroken, and is drawn just balancing upon the monster's spine ; and standing in that prow, for that one single incomputable flash of time, you behold an oars- man, half shrouded by the incensed boiling spout of the whale, and in the act of leaping, as if from a precipice. The action of the whole thing is wonderfully good and true. The half -emptied line-tub floats on the whitened sea ; the wooden poles of the spilled harpoons obliquely bob in it ; the heads of the swimming crew are scattered about the whale in contrasting expressions of affright ; while hi the black stormy distance the ship is bearing down upon the scene. Serious fault might be found with the anatomical details of this whale, but let that pass ; since, for the life of me, I could not draw so good a one. In the second engraving, the boat is in the act of draw- ing alongside the barnacled flank of a large running right whale, that rolls his black weedy bulk in the sea like some mossy rock-slide from the Patagonian cliffs. His jets are erect, full, and black like soot ; so that from so abounding a smoke in the chimney, you would think there must be a brave supper cooking in the great bowels below. Sea-fowls are pecking at the small crabs, shell-fish, and other sea-candies and macaroni, which the right whale LESS ERRONEOUS PICTURES 339 sometimes carries on his pestilent back. And all the while the thick-lipped leviathan is rushing through the deep, leaving tons of tumultuous white curds in his wake, and causing the slight boat to rock in the swells like a skiff caught nigh the paddle-wheels of an ocean steamer. Thus, the foreground is all raging commotion ; but behind, in admirable artistic contrast, is the glassy level of a sea becalmed, the drooping unstarched sails of the powerless ship, and the inert mass of a dead whale, a conquered fortress, with the flag of capture lazily hanging from the whale-pole inserted into his spout -hole. Who Garnery the painter is, or was, I know not. But my life for it he was either practically conversant with his subject, or else marvellously tutored by some experienced whaleman. The French are the lads for painting action. Go and gaze upon all the paintings of Europe, and where will you find such a gallery of living and breathing com- motion on canvas, as in that triumphal hall at Versailles ; where the beholder fights his way, pell-mell, through the consecutive great battles of France ; where every sword seems a flash of the Northern Lights, and the successive armed kings and emperors dash by, like a charge of crowned centaurs ? Not wholly unworthy of a place in that gallery, are those sea-battle pieces of Garnery. The natural aptitude of the French for seizing the picturesqueness of things seems to be peculiarly evinced in what paintings and engravings they have of their whaling scenes. With not one tenth of England's experi- ence in the fishery, and not the thousandth part of that of the Americans, they have nevertheless furnished both nations with the only finished sketches at all capable of conveying the real spirit of the whale-hunt. For the most part, the English and American whale draughtsmen seem entirely content with presenting the mechanical 340 MOBY-DICK outline of things, such as the vacant profile of the whale ; which, so far as picturesqueness of effect is concerned, is about tantamount to sketching the profile of a pyramid. Even Scoresby, the justly renowned right whaleman, after giving us a stiff full-length of the Greenland whale, and three or four delicate miniatures of narwhales and porpoises, treats us to a series of classical engravings of boat-hooks, chopping-knives, and grapnels ; and with the microscopic diligence of a Leuwenhoeck submits to the inspection of a shivering world ninety-six facsimiles of magnified Arctic snow crystals. I mean no disparagement to the excellent voyager (I honour him for a veteran), but in so important a matter it was certainly an oversight not to have procured for every crystal a sworn affidavit taken before a Greenland Justice of the Peace. In addition to those fine engravings from Garnery, there are two other French engravings worthy of note, by some- one who subscribes himself ' H. Durand.' One of them, though not precisely adapted to our present purpose, nevertheless deserves mention on other accounts. It is a quiet noon-scene among the isles of the Pacific ; a French whaler anchored, inshore, in a calm, and lazily taking water on board ; the loosened sails of the ship, and the long leaves of the palms in the background, both drooping together in the breezeless air. The effect is very fine, when considered with reference to its presenting the hardy fishermen under one of their few aspects of oriental repose. The other engraving is quite a different affair : the ship hove-to upon the open sea, and in the very heart of the leviathanic life, with a right whale alongside ; the vessel (in the act of cutting -in) hove over to the monster as if to a quay ; and a boat, hurriedly pushing off from this scene of activity, is about giving chase to whales in the distance. The harpoons and lances lie levelled for use ; three oarsmen are just setting the mast in its hole ; LESS ERRONEOUS PICTURES 341 while from a sudden roll of the sea, the little craft stands half -erect out of the water, like a rearing horse. From the ship, the smoke of the torments of the boiling whale is going up like the smoke over a village of smithies ; and to windward, a black cloud, rising up with earnest of squalls and rains, seems to quicken the activity of the excited seamen. CHAPTER LVII OF WHALES IN PAINT ; IN TEETH ; IN WOOD ; IN SHEET- IRON ; IN STONE ; IN MOUNTAINS ; IN STARS ON Tower Hill, as you go down to the London docks, you may have seen a crippled beggar (or kedger, as the sailors say) holding a painted board before him, representing the tragic scene in which he lost his leg. There are three whales and three boats ; and one of the boats (presumed to contain the missing leg in all its original integrity) is being crunched by the jaws of the foremost whale. Any time these ten years, they tell me, has that man held up that picture, and exhibited that stump to an incredulous world. But the time of his justification has now come. His three whales are as good whales as were ever published in Wapping, at any rate ; and his stump as unquestion- able a stump as any you will find in the Western clearings. But, though forever mounted on that stump, never a stump-speech does the poor whaleman make ; but, with downcast eyes, stands ruefully contemplating his own amputation. Throughout the Pacific, and also in Nantucket, and New Bedford, and Sag Harbour, you will come across lively sketches of whales and whaling scenes, graven by the fishermen themselves on sperm whale-teeth, or ladies' busks wrought out of the right whalebone, and other like skrimshander articles, as the whalemen call the numerous little ingenious contrivances they elaborately carve out of the rough material, in their hours of ocean leisure. Some of them have little boxes of dentistical-looking 342 WHALES VARIOUSLY REPRESENTED 343 implements, specially intended for the skrimshandering business. But, in general, they toil with their jack- knives alone ; and, with that almost omnipotent tool of the sailor, they will turn you out anything you please, in the way of a mariner's fancy. Long exile from Christendom and civilisation inevitably restores a man to that condition in which God placed him, i.e. what is called savagery. Your true whale-hunter is as much a savage as an Iroquois. I myself am a savage, owning no allegiance but to the King of the Cannibals ; and ready at any moment to rebel against him. Now, one of the peculiar characteristics of the savage in his domestic hours, is his wonderful patience of industry. An ancient Hawaiian war-club or spear-paddle, in its full multiplicity and elaboration of carving, is as great a trophy of human perseverance as a Latin lexicon. For, with but a bit of broken sea-shell or a shark's tooth, that miraculous intricacy of wooden net work has been achieved ; and it has cost steady years of steady application. As with the Hawaiian savage, so with the white sailor- savage. With the same marvellous patience, and with the same single shark's tooth, of his one poor jack-knife, he will carve you a bit of bone sculpture, not quite as workmanlike, but as close packed in its maziness of design, as the Greek savage, Achilles's shield ; and full of barbaric spirit and suggestiveness, as the prints of that fine old Dutch savage, Albert Durer. Wooden whales, or whales cut in profile out of the small dark slabs of the noble South Sea war-wood, are frequently met with in the forecastles of American whalers. Some of them are done with much accuracy. At some old gable-roofed country houses you will see brass whales hung by the tail for knockers to the roadside door. When the porter is sleepy, the anvil-headed whale would be best. But these knocking whales are seldom 344 MOBY-DICK remarkable as faithful essays. On the spires of some old- fashioned churches you will see sheet-iron whales placed there for weather-cocks ; but they are so elevated, and besides that are to all intents and purposes so labelled with ' Hands off ! ' you cannot examine them closely enough to decide upon their merit. In bony, ribby regions of the earth, where at the base of high broken cliffs masses of rock lie strewn in fantastic groupings upon the plain, you will often discover images as of the petrified forms of the leviathan partly merged in grass, which of a windy day breaks against them in a surf of green surges. Then, again, in mountainous countries where the traveller is continually girdled by amphitheatrical heights ; here and there from some lucky point of view you will catch passing glimpses of the profiles of whales defined along the undulating ridges. But you must be a thorough whaleman, to see these sights ; and not only that, but if you wish to return to such a sight again, you must be sure and take the exact intersecting latitude and longitude of your first standpoint, else so chance-like are such observations of the hills, that your precise, previous standpoint would require a laborious rediscovery ; like the Soloma islands, which still remain incognita, though once high-ruffed Mendanna trod them and old Figuera chronicled them. Nor when expandingly lifted by your subject, can you fail to trace out great whales in the starry heavens, and boats in pursuit of them ; as when long filled with thoughts of war the Eastern nations saw armies locked in battle among the clouds. Thus at the North have I chased leviathan round and round the Pole with the revolutions of the bright points that first defined him to me. And beneath the effulgent Antarctic skies I have boarded the Argo-Navis, and joined the chase against WHALES VARIOUSLY REPRESENTED 345 the starry Cetus far beyond the utmost stretch of Hydras and the Flying Fish. With a frigate's anchors for my bridle -bits and fasces of harpoons for spurs, would I could mount that whale and leap the topmost skies, to see whether the fabled heavens with all their countless tents really lie encamped beyond my mortal sight ! CHAPTER LVII1 BRIT STEERING north-eastward from the Crozetts, we fell in with vast meadows of brit, the minute, yellow substance upon which the right whale largely feeds. For leagues and leagues it undulated round us, so that we seemed to be sailing through boundless fields of ripe and golden wheat. On the second day, numbers of right whales were seen, who, secure from the attack of a sperm whaler like the Pequod, with open jaws sluggishly swam through the brit, which, adhering to the fringing fibres of that wondrous Venetian blind in their mouths, was in that manner separated from the water that escaped at the lip. As morning mowers, who side by side slowly arid seethingly advance their scythes through the long wet grass of marshy meads ; even so these monsters swam, making a strange, grassy, cutting sound ; and leaving behind them endless swaths of blue upon the yellow sea. 1 But it was only the sound they made as they parted the brit which at all reminded one of mowers. Seen from the mast-heads, especially when they paused and were stationary for a while, their vast black forms looked more like lifeless masses of rock than anything else. And as in the great hunting countries of India, the stranger at a 1 That part of the sea known among whalemen as the ' Brazil Banks ' does not bear that name as the Banks of Newfoundland do, because of there being shallows and soundings there, but because of this remarkable meadow-like appearance, caused by the vast drifts of brit continually floating in those latitudes, where the right whale is often chased. 346 BRIT 347 distance will sometimes pass on the plains recumbent elephants without knowing them to be such, taking them for bare, blackened elevations of the soil ; even so, often, with him who for the first time beholds this species of the leviathans of the sea. And even when recognised at last, their immense magnitude renders it very hard really to believe that such bulky masses of overgrowth can possibly be instinct, in all parts, with the same sort of life that lives in a dog or a horse. Indeed, in other respects, you can hardly regard any creatures of the deep with the same feelings that you do those of the shore. For though some old naturalists have maintained that all creatures of the land are of their kind in the sea ; and though taking a broad general view of the thing, this may very well be ; yet coming to specialities, where, for example, does the ocean furnish any fish that in disposition answers to the sagacious kindness of the dog ? The accursed shark alone can in any generic respect be said to bear comparative analogy to him. But though, to landsmen in general, the native in- habitants of the seas have ever been regarded with emotions unspeakably unsocial and repelling ; though we know the sea to be an everlasting terra incognita, so that Columbus sailed over numberless unknown worlds to discover his one superficial western one ; though, by vast odds, the most terrific of all mortal disasters have im- memorially and indiscriminately befallen tens and hundreds of thousands of those who have gone upon the waters ; though but a moment's consideration will teach, that however baby man may brag of his science and skill, and however much, in a flattering future, that science and skill may augment ; yet forever and forever, to the crack of doom, the sea will insult and murder him, and pulverise the stateliest, stiffest frigate he can make ; nevertheless, by the continual repetition of these very impressions, 348 MOBY-DICK man has lost that sense of the full awfulness of the sea which aboriginally belongs to it. The jirst boat we read of, floated on an ocean, that with Portuguese vengeance had whelmed a whole world with- out leaving so much as a widow. That same ocean rolls now ; that same ocean destroyed the wrecked ships of last year. Yea, foolish mortals, Noah's flood is not yet subsided ; two -thirds of the fair world it yet covers. Wherein differ the sea and the land, that a miracle upon one is not a miracle upon the other ? Preternatural terrors rested upon the Hebrews, when under the feet of Korah and his company the live ground opened and swallowed them up forever ; yet not a modern sun ever sets, but in precisely the same manner the live sea swallows up ships and crews. But not only is the sea such a foe to man who is an alien to it, but it is also a fiend to its own offspring ; worse than the Persian host who murdered his own guests ; sparing not the creatures which itself hath spawned. Like a savage tigress that tossing in the jungle overlays her own cubs, so the sea dashes even the mightiest whales against the rocks, and leaves them there side by side with the split wrecks of ships. No mercy, no power but its own controls it. Panting and snorting like a mad battle- steed that has lost its rider, the masterless ocean overruns the globe. Consider the subtleness of the sea ; how its most dreaded creatures glide under water, unapparent for the most part, and treacherously hidden beneath the loveliest tints of azure. Consider also the devilish brilliance and beauty of many of its most remorseless tribes, as the dainty embellished shape of many species of sharks. Consider, once more, the universal cannibalism of the sea ; all whose creatures prey upon each other, carrying on eternal war since the world began. BRIT 349 Consider all this ; and then turn to this green, gentle, and most docile earth ; consider them both, the sea and the land ; and do you not find a strange analogy to something in yourself ? For as this appalling ocean surrounds the verdant land, so in the soul of man there lies one insular Tahiti, full of peace and joy, but encom- passed by all the horrors of the half -known life. God keep thee ! Push not off from that isle, thou canst never return ! CHAPTER LIX SQUID SLOWLY wading through the meadows of brit, the Pequod still held on her way north-eastward toward the island of Java ; a gentle air impelling her keel, so that in the surrounding serenity her three tall tapering masts mildly waved to that languid breeze, as three mild palms on a plain. And still, at wide intervals in the silvery night, the lonely, alluring jet would be seen. But one transparent blue morning, when a stillness almost preternatural spread over the sea, however un- attended with any stagnant calm ; when the long bur- nished sun-glade on the waters seemed a golden finger laid across them, enjoining some secrecy ; when the slippered waves whispered together as they softly ran on ; in this profound hush of the visible sphere a strange spectre was seen by Daggoo from the mainmast-head. In the distance, a great white mass lazily rose, and rising higher and higher, and disentangling itself from the azure, at last gleamed before our prow like a snow-slide, new slid from the hills. Thus glistening for a moment, as slowly it subsided, and sank. Then once more arose, and silently gleamed. It seemed not a whale ; and yet is this Moby- Dick ? thought Daggoo. Again the phantom went down, but on reappearing once more, with a stiletto-like cry that startled every man from his nod, the negro yelled out 4 There ! there again ! there she breaches ! right ahead ! The White Whale, the White Whale ! ' Upon this, the seamen rushed to the yard-arms, as in swarming-time the bees rush to the boughs. Bareheaded in the sultry sun, Ahab stood on the bowsprit, and with one 350 SQUID 351 hand pushed far behind in readiness to wave his orders to the helmsman, cast his eager glance in the direction indi- cated aloft by the outstretched motionless arm of Daggoo. Whether the flitting attendance of the one still and solitary jet had gradually worked upon Ahab, so that he was now prepared to connect the ideas of mildness and repose with the first sight of the particular whale he pursued ; however this was, or whether his eagerness betrayed him ; whichever way it might have been, no sooner did he distinctly perceive the white mass, than with a quick intensity he instantly gave orders for lowering. The four boats were soon on the water ; Ahab's in advance, and all swiftly pulling toward their prey. Soon it went down, and while, with oars suspended, we were awaiting its reappearance, lo ! in the same spot where it sank, once more it slowly rose. Almost forgetting for the moment all thoughts of Moby-Dick, we now gazed at the most wondrous phenomenon which the secret seas have hitherto revealed to mankind. A vast pulpy mass, furlongs in length and breadth, of a glancing cream-colour, lay floating on the water, innumerable long arms radiating from its centre, and curling and twisting like a nest of anacondas, as if blindly to clutch at any hapless object within reach. No perceptible face or front did it have ; no conceivable token of either sensation or instinct ; but undulated there on the billows, an unearthly, formless, chance-like apparition of life. As with a low sucking sound it slowly disappeared again, Starbuck still gazing at the agitated waters where it had sunk, with a wild voice exclaimed ' Almost rather had I seen Moby-Dick and fought him, than to have seen thee, thou white ghost ! ' ' What was it, sir ? ' said Flask. ' The great live squid, which, they say, few whale-ships ever beheld, and returned to their ports to tell of it.' 352 MOBY-DICK But Ahab said nothing ; turning his boat, he sailed back to the vessel ; the rest as silently following. Whatever superstitions the sperm whalemen in general have connected with the sight of this object, certain it is, that a glimpse of it being so very unusual, that circum- stance has gone far to invest it with portent ousness. So rarely is it beheld, that though one and all of them declare it to be the largest animated thing in the ocean, yet very few of them have any but the most vague ideas concern- ing its true nature and form ; notwithstanding, they believe it to furnish to the sperm whale his only food. For though other species of whales find their food above water, and may be seen by man in the act of feeding, the spermaceti whale obtains his whole food in unknown zones below the surface ; and .only by inference is it that any one can tell of what, precisely, that food consists. At times, when closely pursued, he will disgorge what are supposed to be the detached arms of the squid ; some of them thus exhibited exceeding twenty and thirty feet in length. They fancy that the monster to which these arms belonged ordinarily clings by them to the bed of the ocean ; and that the sperm whale, unlike other species, is supplied with teeth in order to attack and tear it. There seems some ground to imagine that the great Kraken of Bishop Pontoppodan may ultimately resolve itself into Squid. The manner in which the Bishop de- scribes it, as alternately rising and sinking, with some other particulars he narrates, in all this the two corre- spond. But much abatement is necessary with respect to the incredible bulk he assigns it. By some naturalists who have vaguely heard rumours of the mysterious creature, here spoken of, it is included among the class of cuttle-fish, to which, indeed, in certain external respects it would seem to belong, but only as the Anak of the tribe. CHAPTER LX THE LINE WITH reference to the whaling scene shortly to be de- scribed, as well as for the better understanding of all similar scenes elsewhere presented, I have here to speak of the magical, sometimes horrible whale-line. The line originally used in the fishery was of the best hemp, slightly vapoured with tar, not impregnated with it, as in the case of ordinary ropes ; for while tar, as ordinarily used, makes the hemp more pliable to the rope- maker, and also renders the rope itself more convenient to the sailor for common ship use ; yet, not only would the ordinary quantity too much stiffen the whale-line for the close coiling to which it must be subjected ; but as most seamen are beginning to learn, tar in general by no means adds to the rope's durability or strength, how- ever much it may give it compactness and gloss. Of late years the Manilla rope has in the American fishery almost entirely superseded hemp as a material for whale-lines ; for, though not so durable as hemp, it is stronger, and far more soft and elastic ; and I will add (since there is an aesthetics in all things), is much more handsome and becoming to the boat, than hemp. Hemp is a dusky, dark fellow, a sort of Indian ; but Manilla is as a golden-haired Circassian to behold. The whale-line is only two-thirds of an inch in thickness. At first sight, you would not think it so strong as it really is. By experiment its one and fifty yarns will each sus- pend a weight of one hundred and twenty pounds ; so VOL. i. z 354 MOBY-DICK that the whole rope will bear a strain nearly equal to three tons. In length, the common sperm whale-line measures something over two hundred fathoms. Toward the stern of the boat it is spirally coiled away in the tub, not like the worm-pipe of a still though, but so as to form one round, cheese-shaped mass of densely bedded 'sheaves,' or layers of concentric spiralisations, without any hollow but the 'heart/ or minute vertical tube formed at the axis of the cheese. As the least tangle or kink in the coiling would, in running out, infallibly take somebody's arm, leg, or entire body off, the utmost precaution is used in stowing the line in its tub. Some harpooneers will consume almost an entire morning in this business, carrying the line high aloft and then reeving it downward through a block toward the tub, so as in the act of coiling to free it from all possible wrinkles and twists. In the English boats two tubs are used instead of one ; the same line being continuously coiled in both tubs. There is some advantage in this ; because these twin -tubs being so small they fit more readily into the boat, and do not strain it so much ; whereas, the American tub, nearly three feet in diameter and of proportionate depth, makes a rather bulky freight for a craft whose planks are but one half-inch in thickness ; for the bottom of the whale- boat is like critical ice, which will bear up a considerable distributed weight, but not very much of a concentrated one. When the painted canvas cover is clapped on the American line-tub, the boat looks as if it were pulling off with a prodigious great wedding-cake to present to the whales. Both ends of the line are exposed ; the lower end terminating in an eye -splice or loop coming up from the bottom against the side of the tub, and hanging over its edge completely disengaged from everything. This arrangement of the lower end is necessary on two accounts. THE LINE 355 First : In order to facilitate the fastening to it of an additional line from a neighbouring boat, in case the stricken whale should sound so deep as to threaten to carry off the entire line originally attached to the har- poon. In these instances, the whale of course is shifted like a mug of ale, as it were, from the one boat to the other ; though the first boat always hovers at hand to assist its consort. Second : This arrangement is indis- pensable for common safety's sake ; for were the lower end of the line in any way attached to the boat, and were the whale then to run the line out to the end almost in a single, smoking minute as he sometimes does, he would not stop there, for the doomed boat would infallibly be dragged down after him into the profundity of the sea ; and in that case no town -crier would ever find her again. Before lowering the boat for the chase, the upper end of the line is taken aft from the tub, and passing round the logger-head there, is again carried forward the entire length of the boat, resting crosswise upon the loom or handle of every man's oar, so that it jogs against his wrist in rowing ; and also passing between the men, as they alternately sit at the opposite gunwales, to the leaded chocks or grooves in the extreme pointed prow of the boat, where a wooden pin or skewer the size of a common quill, prevents it from slipping out. From the chocks it hangs in a slight festoon over the bows, and is then passed inside the boat again ; and some ten or twenty fathoms (called box-line) being coiled upon the box in the bows, it con- tinues its way to the gunwale still a little further aft, and is then attached to the short -warp the rope which is immediately connected with the harpoon ; but previous to that connection, the short -warp goes through sundry mystifications too tedious to detail. Thus the whale-line folds the whole boat in its compli- cated coils, twisting and writhing around it in almost 356 MOBY-DICK every direction. All the oarsmen are involved in its perilous contortions ; so that to the timid eye of the landsman, they seem as Indian jugglers, with the deadliest snakes sportively festooning their limbs. Nor can any son of mortal woman, for the first time, seat himself amid those hempen intricacies, and while straining his utmost at the oar, bethink him that at any unknown instant the harpoon may be darted, and all these horrible contortions be put in play like ringed lightnings ; he cannot be thus circumstanced without a shudder that makes the very marrow in his bones to quiver in him like a shaken jelly. Yet habit strange thing ! what cannot habit accom- plish ? Gayer sallies, more merry mirth, better jokes, and brighter repartees, you never heard over your mahogany, than you will hear over the half-inch white cedar of the whale-boat, when thus hung in hangman's nooses ; and, like the six burghers of Calais before King Edward, the six men composing the crew pull into the jaws of death, with a halter around every neck, as you may say. Perhaps a very little thought will now enable you to account for those repeated whaling disasters some few of which are casually chronicled of this man or that man being taken out of the boat by the line, and lost. For, when the line is darting out, to be seated then in the boat is like being seated in the midst of the manifold whizzings of a steam-engine in full play, when every flying beam, and shaft, and wheel, is grazing you. It is worse ; for you cannot sit motionless in the heart of these perils, because the boat is rocking like a cradle, and you are pitched one way and the other, without the slightest warning ; and only by a certain self-adjusting buoyancy and simultaneousness of volition and action can you escape being made a Mazeppa of, and run away with where the all-seeing sun himself could never pierce you out. THE LINE 357 Again : as the profound calm which only apparently precedes and prophesies of the storm is perhaps more awful than the storm itself ; for, indeed, the calm is but the wrapper and envelope of the storm ; and con- tains it in itself, as the seemingly harmless rifle holds the fatal powder, and the ball, and the explosion ; so the graceful repose of the line, as it silently serpentines about the oarsmen before being brought into actual play this is a thing which carries more of true terror than any other aspect of this dangerous affair. But why say more ? All men live enveloped in whale -lines. All are born with halters round their necks ; but it is only when caught in the swift, sudden turn of death, that mortals realise the silent, subtle, ever-present perils of life. And if you be a philosopher, though seated in the whale-boat, you would not at heart feel one whit more of terror, than though seated before your evening fire with a poker, and not a harpoon, by your side. END OF VOL. I. PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY PS Melville,, Herman 2384 Moby-Dick M6 1922 v.l Share on FacebookShare Share on TwitterTweet Share via EmailEmail My daughter ran out of the large room, screaming in tears. “Why did you bring me here?!” she sobbed. “Why?!” She was 5 years old at the time, and just about as traumatized as I’d ever seen her. It truly was a vault of horrors: blood, pain, anguish, wounds, gashes, torn flesh. Carcasses everywhere. And she was terrified. Let me back up and explain. It was about eight years ago. Our older daughter had a school assignment to visit a California mission. Built by the Catholics in the 1700s and 1800s, the California missions are a vital part of California history. And so we were excited to take our daughters to check one out, about 20 miles from our home. And the mission was lovely: beautiful landscaping, old buildings, indigenous flowers, a trickling fountain. And then we walked into a large hall—and that’s when my younger daughter lost it. The space was full of crucified Jesuses. Every wall, from floor to ceiling, was adorned with wooden and plaster sculptures of Jesus on the cross: bloody, cut, and crying in pain. Some were very life-like, others more impressionistic. But all exhibited a tortured man in agony. My daughter had no context to understand it; she had no idea what Christianity was all about and had never been exposed to this most famous killing in history. She just saw what it objectively was: a large torture chamber. And she burst into tears and ran out. I followed her outside, and once I had caught up with her in the courtyard, she wanted an explanation. But how does a secular parent explain such gore to a 5-year-old? Um, well, you see … there are millions of people who think that we are all born evil and that there is an all-powerful God who wants to punish us forever in hell—but then he had his only son tortured and killed so that we could be saved from eternal torture. Get it? The whole thing is so totally, horrible, absurdly sadistic and counter-intuitive and wicked. Not to mention baldly untrue. And ever since that day, I’ve been acutely aware of the ways in which certain doctrinal aspects of Christianity can be harmful for children. While this list is by no means exhaustive, here are some specific ways in which the more ardent/literal forms of Christianity can potentially harm children: Christianity teaches children that they are intrinsically evil; they did nothing wrong, but just by being born and being alive, they are evil. This is a terrible thing to teach children, not only because it is false, but because it is the exact wrong message children should be taught, which is that they are intrinsically wonderful, noble, and lovable, and that they have boundless goodness inside them. Christianity teaches children that there exists a powerful, evil Devil. A most dangerous demon. Beware! This horrible falsity infuses their childhood with needless fear and dread, and teaches them that the world is a dangerous place, with a malevolent demon lurking in the wait. In my own research, I’ve interviewed many adults who describe the whole Satan thing as a decidedly traumatic element of their children, and in some egregious cases, unambiguously abusive. Christianity teaches children that God killed his own child to make up for our wickedness. In other words, we are evil, and by killing his own child, our evil is somehow wiped away and forgiven. Our guilt is cleansed. But how does that work? If I abuse my wife, and then a cop comes over and kills my son, does that atone for the wickedness I committed against my wife? How so? Only I can atone for my own wrongdoings and harmful actions. If I abuse my wife, I need to make amends in order to earn her forgiveness. I can’t kill our cat instead. And besides, why couldn’t God forgive us without killing his son? Does he require a blood sacrifice, like some pagan ogre? The entire story of Jesus “dying for our sins” makes no moral or ethical sense, and it is an extremely confusing/disturbing tale to tell our children. Christianity teaches children that those who accept Jesus as their personal savior are good/saved/going to heaven and those that do not accept Jesus as their personal savior are sinful and destined for hell. This can cause children to feel smug, superior, self-righteous, judgmental, and to look down upon and condemn others—be they kids on the schoolyard, neighbors, or even relatives. Christianity teaches children that masturbation is evil. It is not. It is natural, normal, and healthy. And pleasurable. Teaching children to feel guilty or ashamed of masturbating, teaching them that doing so is disapproved of by a son-slaying God, and can even land them in hell—this is all nonsense, but more than that, potentially abusive. article continues after advertisement I could go on—but that’s enough for now. And despite everything that I’ve said so far, I could surely write many pages on all the good that certain forms of Christianity can do for children; Christianity can provide comfort and hope for children in dire straits, it can prod children to be charitable and altruistic, it can develop within children an ability to be forgiving. I would certainly not argue that all forms or manifestations of Christianity are harmful; I myself attended a progressive Episcopalian Christian summer camp every year of my childhood—and loved every minute it. The camp was full of smiles, warmth, and water fights, with nary a word about devils or sins to be heard. Many versions of Christianity focus on Jesus’s ethical teachings, foster love, and bring out the best in our kids. But we know all this. The notion that Christianity is good for kids has been trumpeted for centuries, virtually unchallenged and uncontested. What hasn’t been trumpeted nearly enough—nor studied nearly enough—is the potentially dangerous aspects of Christianity, aspects that stem from the very core/central tenets of the faith. As a secular parent, I believe that we need to talk more openly about the potential harm Christianity can do to kids—not just the potential good. We mustn’t shy away from such skeptical scrutiny for fear of offending people. For further reading, I’d recommend Breaking Their Will: Shedding Light on Religious Child Maltreatment by Janet Heimlich, Forced Into Faith by Innaiah Narisetti, Spare the Child: The Religious Roots of Punishment and the Psychological Impact of Physical Abuse by Philip Greven, and my own Faith No More: Why People Reject Religion.or two decades, the U.S. government has been engaging with faith leaders in Muslim communities at home and around the world in an attempt to stamp out extremism and prevent believers vulnerable to radicalization from going down a path that leads to violence. Now, after the dangerous QAnon conspiracy theory helped to motivate the insurrection at the U.S. Capitol, with many participants touting their Christian faith — and as evangelical pastors throughout the country ache over the spread of the conspiracy theory among their flocks, and its very real human toll — it’s worth asking whether the time has come for a new wave of outreach to religious communities, this time aimed at evangelical Christians. “I personally feel a great burden, since I came from these communities, to try to figure out how to help the leaders,” says Elizabeth Neumann, a former top official at the Department of Homeland Security who resigned from Trump administration in April 2020. The challenge in part is that, in this “particular case, I don’t know if the government is a credible voice at all,” she says. “You don’t want ‘Big Brother’ calling the local pastor and saying, ‘Hey, here’s your tips for the week.’” Neumann, who was raised in the evangelical tradition, is a devout Christian. Her knowledge of that world, and her expertise on issues of violent extremism, gives her a unique insight into the ways QAnon is driving some Christians to extremism and violence. She sees QAnon’s popularity among certain segments of Christendom not as an aberration, but as the troubling-but-natural outgrowth of a strain of American Christianity. In this tradition, one’s belief is based less on scripture than on conservative culture, some political disagreements are seen as having nigh-apocalyptic stakes and “a strong authoritarian streak” runs through the faith. For this type of believer, love of God and love of country are sometimes seen as one and the same. Christian nationalism is “a huge theme throughout evangelical Christendom,” Neumann says, referring to teachings that posit America as God’s chosen nation. Christians who subscribe to those teachings believe the United States has a covenant with God, and that if it is broken, the nation risks literal destruction — analogous to the siege of Jerusalem in the Hebrew Bible. In the eyes of these believers, that covenant is threatened by cultural changes like taking prayer out of public schools and legalizing abortion and gay marriage, Neumann says. “[Christian nationalists] see it in cataclysmic terms: This is the moment, and God’s going to judge us,” she says. “When you paint it in existential terms like that, a lot of people feel justified to carry out acts of violence in the name of their faith.” How should the country, and the new administration, approach concerns about extremism among American Christians? What role can faith leaders play in trying to keep vulnerable believers from the temptations of conspiracy theories? And do the totems of American evangelicalism look at all different through the eyes of a national security expert? To sort through all of this, POLITICO Magazine spoke with Neumann this week. A condensed transcript of that conversation follows, edited for length and clarity. In May 2019, an FBI memo described QAnon as a domestic terror threat. You were still working at the Department of Homeland Security at the time. Do you remember when you first became aware of QAnon? I remember asking my staff about it. I’d probably seen a news article about it and said, “Hey, are we concerned?” At the time, it struck us as this very random set of conspiracy theories. People in this country have followed conspiracy theories for years, and there are always those fringe elements you worry could be motivated to do something violent. It was definitely not seen as a high-level threat. It was kind of localized — you’re informing state and local law enforcement, “Hey, we’re seeing this activity,” so they might be better equipped to understand what’s driving it. MOST READ AP21364721368302 (1).jpg Jan. 6 panel wonders: Is Trump criminal referral necessary? Ginni Thomas Is Not A Liar Palin’s unexpected bid jolts Alaska Trumpian Conservatives Hold an ‘Emergency’ Meeting Over Russia Trump endorses Palin in Alaska House special election The DHS and FBI often put out bulletins that are just: “This is an incident that happened, this is what we assess it to mean, and here are the motivations or ideology.” It’s really there to provide context for law enforcement. In 2019, QAnon was more of the “huh, that’s new, but not really of concern” category. When did it become a security concern for you? The pandemic. QAnon was this fringe thing, it was concerning. Then, in 2020, it went on steroids. In March, even before the shutdowns, I had my staff look at the research we use for developing behavioral indicators of individuals who might mobilize to violence. If we go down this path of having to all stay home, does that increase stress factors? Does it increase risk factors known to be common in people who carry out attacks? The answer was yes. “QAnon was this fringe thing, it was concerning. Then, in 2020, it went on steroids.” You started hearing the anti-government conspiracies — which was totally predictable. Anybody who has spent any time in Republican or libertarian politics knows you’re going to have people unhappy about the government. That’s fine; you can predict that. The question then is that if you know that’s going to be a challenge, what can the government do to help individuals understand why it is issuing stay-at-home orders, why it’s necessary, why it’s legal and constitutional? If the government had done a better job at that, we would have seen slightly less anger, slightly less of that victim-persecution complex. With the pandemic, you had what was perceived to be government overreach; you had social isolation, which is a known risk factor [for extremism]; you had some people with a lot more time on their hands because they were not commuting, not taking kids to ballgames and not going to happy hour after work; you had economic stress — another known risk factor — as people lost jobs or moved to part-time status; you had people who lost loved ones. There was this great sense that people had lost control; our lives as we knew them had been upended. People who had a strong, healthy sense of self or community were able to mitigate their isolation. But for individuals already on the cusp, this made them vulnerable. We use that word, “vulnerable,” to describe people who are not necessarily radicalized yet, but have factors in their lives that make it easier for them to move on a pathway towards extreme radicalized thought — and then, for a smaller subset, mobilizes them to violence. That’s what we saw in 2020. We saw any number of people spending more time online looking for answers. You had increases in militia movements. The Moonshot CVE Group, which studies radicalization, said that in states with stay-at-home orders that lasted 10 days or longer, [online] searches for white-supremacist content increased by 21 percent. In states where there either weren’t stay-at-home orders or they lasted nine days or fewer, that increase was only 1 percent. We weren’t sure how it was going to happen, but we predicted that we would see violence in some form or fashion. The militia that attempted to kidnap Michigan Gov. Gretchen Whitmer — that was horrible, but not really shocking. The violence at protests? Not surprising. And the fact that you had white-supremacist groups using the protests to commit accelerationist violence was also not surprising — even though the president thought it was Antifa. We knew we were going to see more radicalization and violence. “For people who studied disinformation, it became clear that the call was coming from inside the house.” The combination of that on top of a pandemic, on top of a campaign where the president was sowing his own conspiracy theories and laying the groundwork for what eventually became [the lie] that the election had been stolen — well, some would say he started laying the groundwork four years ago. For people who studied disinformation, it became clear that the call was coming from inside the house. That kind of primordial soup makes conditions ripe for vulnerable individuals to move into this space. QAnon is not designed to be logical; it’s designed to meet these emotional and psychological needs. Over the last year or so, a number of evangelical Christian leaders have shared their alarm at what they’re seeing with members of their churches being pulled into the QAnon world. You are a Christian raised in the evangelical faith. Do you see anything about the evangelical tradition that could make its believers more susceptible to QAnon? I really struggle with this question. I’ve been trying to figure out how it is so obvious to me — and I don’t mean to pat myself on the back. I actually do read the Bible. Yet there are people who read scripture and attend church but are also die-hard into believing the election was stolen or have gone down the QAnon rabbit hole. What’s the distinction there? I find that hard to answer. There is, in more conservative Christian movements, a strong authoritarian streak, where they don’t believe in the infallibility of their pastor, but they act like it; they don’t believe in the infallibility of the head of the home, but they sometimes act like it; where you’re not allowed to question authority. You see this on full display in the criticisms of the way the Southern Baptist Convention is dealing with sexual abuse, which is so similar to the Catholic Church [sex abuse scandal]. There is this increasing frustration that church leaders have [this view]: “If we admit sin, then they won’t trust us to lead anymore.” But if the church is not a safe place to admit that you messed up, then I don’t know where is — or you clearly don’t believe what you preach. “There is, in more conservative Christian movements, a strong authoritarian streak.” The authoritarian, fundamentalist nature of certain evangelical strands is a prominent theme in the places where you see the most ardent Trump supporters or the QAnon believers, because they’ve been told: “You don’t need to study [scripture]. We’re giving you the answer.” Then, when Rev. Robert Jeffress [a prominent conservative Baptist pastor in Dallas] says you’ve got to support Donald Trump, and makes some argument that sounds “churchy,” people go, “Well, I don’t like Trump’s language, but OK, that’s the right thing.” It creates people who are not critical thinkers. They’re not necessarily reading scripture for themselves. Or if they are, they’re reading it through the lens of one pastor, and they’re not necessarily open to hearing outside perspectives on what the text might say. It creates groupthink. Another factor is Christian nationalism. That’s a huge theme throughout evangelical Christendom. It’s subtle: Like, you had the Christian flag and the American flag at the front of the church, and if you went to a Christian school, you pledged allegiance to the Christian flag and the American flag. There was this merger that was always there when I was growing up. And it was really there for the generation ahead of me, in the ’50s and ’60s. Some people interpreted it as: Love of country and love of our faith are the same thing. And for others, there’s an actual explicit theology. There was this whole movement in the ’90s and 2000s among conservatives to explain how amazing [America’s] founding was: Our founding was inspired by God, and there’s no explanation for how we won the Revolutionary War except God, and, by the way, did you know that the founders made this covenant with God? It’s American exceptionalism but goes beyond that. It says that we are the next version of Israel from the Old Testament, that we are God’s chosen nation, and that is a special covenant — a two-way agreement with God. We can’t break it, and if we do, what happened to Israel will happen to us: We will be overrun by whatever the next Babylon is, taken into captivity, and He will remove His blessing from us. What [threatens] that covenant? The moment we started taking prayer out of [public] schools and allowing various changes in our culture — [the legalization of] abortion is one of those moments; gay marriage is another. They see it in cataclysmic terms: This is the moment, and God’s going to judge us. They view the last 50 years of moral decline as us breaking our covenant, and that because of that, God’s going to remove His blessing. When you paint it in existential terms like that, a lot of people feel justified to carry out acts of violence in the name of their faith. “When you paint it in existential terms like that, a lot of people feel justified to carry out acts of violence in the name of their faith.” The elections in 2016 and 2020 were a fight in existential terms for believers of this teaching — meaning, if we allow Hillary Clinton or Joe Biden to be president, they are going to put the nail in the coffin [of the covenant], and the next thing we’re going to see is that Christianity is going to be outlawed, pastors will not be able to teach the Bible and Christians will become persecuted. Now, here’s the caveat: Some of that fear is not out of thin air. There is a real “cancel culture,” where you see a mob mentality swarm on somebody who holds a biblically based viewpoint on, say, gay marriage, and you see someone forced out of a position or lose sponsorships or advertising. But they follow that to what they think is a logical conclusion — that eventually, pastors will not be able to preach against homosexuality or abortion, and if [they do], they’re going to end up arrested and unable to preach. I’ve heard that argument made multiple times over the last 10 years. The irrationality is the idea that there are no protections, that the courts wouldn’t step in and say, “No, the First Amendment applies to Christians as well.” It tries to assert that they are losing power and must regain that power by any means necessary — which is why you can justify voting for Trump, so that we can, for God’s purposes, maintain this Christian nation. But that’s nowhere in scripture. Scripture, when it talks about what “Israel” is in the New Testament, it explains that it’s the church — which is not owned by any one nation; it’s a global church. And even if somehow you wanted to say that the American church is what [scripture is] referencing, [the Bible] tells us [to do] the exact opposite of what they’re talking about. We are told not to seek power. We’re told to be humble. We’re told to turn the other cheek. Jesus, in confronting Caesar’s representative at his trial, says, “My kingdom is not of this world.” “My fight is not here,” basically. Our purpose as believers is to be salt and light; it’s not to force everybody else to hold our beliefs. To fix that, you really have to go back to scripture. You can’t just be like, “Christian nationalism is wrong.” You have to go back to what the Bible says, versus what you were taught as an American Christian, where it was so interwoven. It took me a while to even discover it. Once somebody pointed it out, [I was] like, “Oh, my gosh. I was taught that, and you’re right, that’s not correct.” But it’s a very hard thing for people to [address], because it requires acknowledging that how you were raised or the people that you trusted either intentionally lied to you or were just wrong. It’s hard. It takes humility to go there. It’s a hard thing for people to recognize and escape from. But sadly, it’s a security issue that we have to address, because it has led to this. “It requires acknowledging that how you were raised or the people that you trusted either intentionally lied to you or were just wrong.” It sounds like you’re describing a reality for some evangelical Christians where their church is based more in culture than scripture — and that this makes them more susceptible to things like QAnon? Oh, absolutely. Here’s the thing, and I will do my best to explain it from a secular perspective: There’s text in the New Testament where the Apostle Paul is admonishing a church he helped establish: “You should be mature adults now in your faith, but I’m still having to feed you with milk.” He’s basically saying, you should be 18, but you’re still nursing, and we need you to get it together. There was a big movement in the ’90s called Seeker-Friendly Churches. Willow Creek [one of the most prominent of these churches] did a self-assessment about 10 or 15 years ago, and one of the things that they found is while they had converted people to Christians, there was a lack of growth in their faith. They were not learning the scriptures. They were not engaged in community. They were not discipling anybody. And [Willow Creek’s] assessment was: We failed. We baptized some people, but they’re not actually maturing. One of my questions is: Are we seeing in the last four years one of the consequences of that failure? They didn’t mature [in their faith], and they’re very easily led astray by what scripture calls “false teachers.” My thesis here is that if we had a more scripturally based set of believers in this country — if everybody who calls themselves a “Christian” had actually read through, I don’t know, 80 percent of the Bible — they would not have been so easily deceived. For the nearly 20 years since 9/11, to counter violent extremism, the U.S. government has done outreach to imams and other faith leaders in Muslim communities. In light of the QAnon problem, should we be doing the same with leaders in evangelical Christian communities? I think we need to learn from the mistakes of the last 20 years. And I am very mindful that there are places where things went very well [with Countering Violent Extremism outreach], and there are also places where things did not go well. It’s a mixed bag. I personally feel a great burden, since I came from these communities, to try to figure out how to help the leaders in those communities. I don’t know that I’m a credible voice anymore because of my political outspokenness, but there certainly are pastors who are struggling with these questions: How do I help somebody that has gone down the QAnon rabbit hole? Or, to put it in biblical terms, how do I help somebody who has made Trump an idol? Pastors, church leaders, faith leaders — when you frame it that way for them, the answers start to come: “Oh, we know how to do this.” Usually, pastors have done a lot of counseling or shepherding in their lifetimes. They know that you don’t approach people head-on with dogmatic arguments; that tends to not work. You need to recognize that there’s often something else going on that has made somebody vulnerable to being deceived, and coming out of that deception can be painful and humbling. But faith leaders — the good ones, at least — are perfect for that kind of work. So even though the particular topic itself may be different than they’re used to, they have many of the skill sets you need. “For QAnon, January 20 may historically be looked at as a light-switch moment.” Some of [what we need to do is] supporting them, because it’s disheartening work. It takes a long time for somebody to disengage. It’s usually not a light switch — although for QAnon, January 20 may historically be looked at as a light-switch moment. [QAnon lore has long held that on January 20th, Joe Biden would not be inaugurated, Donald Trump would remain president, declare martial law and many prominent political leaders would be arrested.] You’ve seen many people go, “Oh, I was conned,” and they’re out. But for others, it may be a longer journey. Certainly, what they teach from their pulpits [is relevant], even going back to the basics. Scripture teaches us not to spend time in conspiracies. You don’t have to say anything about “stop the steal” or whatever. Or teach the Ten Commandments and the fact that bearing false witness and slander are actually what conspiracy theories do: You are believing made-up sets of “facts” about people you don’t have firsthand knowledge of. There are ways pastors can address it. But it’s hard, and they need a community where they feel safe to be encouraged to do this work. Your question is about the government. And I’m intentionally avoiding that — in part because, in this particular case, I don’t know if the government is a credible voice at all. They probably would do more harm than good. The best thing they can do is provide fact-based resources — for example, threat briefings to educate [ordinary citizens] on signs of individuals who might be radicalizing into violence. Providing that information would be helpful, but you kind of want there to be a cut-out. You don’t want “Big Brother” calling the local pastor and saying, “Hey, here’s your tips for the week.” That’s just going to breed more conspiracies. What can government do? Well, they’re resourced to help state and local governments, to do research, to identify best practices, to keep us informed about the threats, to give grant funding for prevention work. But those concepts are inherently built around the idea that it’s a multidisciplinary approach. And when we say “multidisciplinary,” it’s mental health, it’s human services, it’s education. The disinformation problem is not going away. We can build more resilience. We can put more guardrails in place. But it’s going to be a problem for us for a long time.